# 1011246 911112819signed

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
EFFECTIVE: 11-28-16  PAGE 1 OF 9 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish procedures for a training program in Los Angeles County to obtain 
approval for a Public Safety-First Aid (PSFA) and/or Basic Tactical Casualty 
Care (BTCC) training program and requirements to maintain program approval. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 1.5 
Health and Safety Code, Div. 2.5, Section 1797, et seq. 
Training Standards for Basic Tactical Casualty Care and Coordination with 
EMS during Terrorism Incidents (EMSA #170) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Approved PSFA and/or BTCC Curriculum: Curriculum approved by the EMS Agency without 
receiving PSFA and/or BTCC training program approval. 
 
Approved PSFA and/or BTCC Training Program: A training program that has been approved 
by the EMS Agency or the California EMS Authority to train public safety personnel in public 
safety-first aid and/or basic tactical casualty care first aid. 
 
Public Safety Personnel: Firefighter, lifeguard (of a municipality), or peace officer (as defined 
by section 830 of the Penal Code) not employed as an EMT. 
 
Tamper Resistant: A procedure or technique to prevent alteration, fraud or forgery of a 
document designed by the PSFA and BTCC training program. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Training programs providing training or headquartered in Los Angeles County are 
eligible to apply for approval of a PSFA and/or BTCC training program. 
 
2. An individual or organization may request PSFA and/or BTCC curriculum approval. 
Curriculum approval is not authorization for an individual or organization to conduct 
PSFA and/or BTCC training. 
 
3. Training and competency evaluation for all personnel shall meet the minimum 
requirements set forth by the California EMS Authority and the Los Angeles County EMS 
Agency. 
 
4. Instructors must have adequate training, credentials, and/or experience in educational 
content and methodology in order to ensure that courses adequately address the 
educational requirements and needs of the personnel. 
 
  

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 2 OF 9 
POLICY: 
 
I. TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
The EMS Agency has the primary responsibility for approving and monitoring the 
performance of PSFA and BTCC Training Programs in Los Angeles County to ensure 
compliance with local policies, statutes, regulations, and guidelines. 
 
A. Approval Process: 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall be the approving agency for PSFA and/or BTCC 
training programs whose headquarters or training is located within Los 
Angeles County. 
 
2. The California EMS Authority shall be the approving agency for PSFA 
and BTCC training programs for state public safety agencies. 
 
3. Program approval may be granted up to four (4) years from the last day of 
the month in which the application is approved. This approval is not 
transferable from person to person or organization to organization. 
 
B. Training Program Application Process: 
 
1. Interested training programs shall obtain a PSFA and BTCC training 
program application packet from the EMS Agency website. 
 
2. Any individual or organization, public or private, interested in providing 
PSFA and/or BTCC training for public safety personnel shall submit a 
complete application packet. Courses shall not be advertised or offered 
until program approval has been granted. 
 
3. The application packet shall contain: 
 
a. A complete training program application signed by the program 
director identifying which program(s) applying for approval. 
 
b. Curriculum vitae or resume and copies of applicable licenses and 
certifications of the program director and instructors. 
 
c. A complete training program, as identified in the EMS Agency 
training program application, meeting the requirements set forth in 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 1.5 and/or EMSA 
Guideline #170 to include but not limited to: 
 
i. Course schedule 
 
ii. Instructional objectives 
 
iii. Lessons/training 
 
iv. Written and skills performance evaluations with: 
 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 3 OF 9 
a) Answer key 
 
b) Passing criteria 
 
d. A letter or memo, signed by the program director for the PSFA 
training program, which states: 
 
i. All personnel will be trained in CPR equivalent to BLS for 
the Healthcare Provider (American Heart Association) or 
Professional Rescuer (American Red Cross). 
 
ii. Training will be competency based and consist of no less 
than eight hours for retraining and twenty-one hours if 
applying for an initial training program. 
 
iii. Retraining and evaluation of competency of all personnel 
will be performed every two years. 
 
e. A letter or memo, signed by the program director for the PSFA 
and BTCC training programs, stating that all personnel shall 
receive a copy of trauma center locations in Los Angeles County 
provided by the EMS Agency. 
 
f. A copy of the attendance record or description of the on-line 
registration process and tracking of course completion 
requirements. 
 
g. A copy of the tamper resistance course completion certificate. 
 
h. Pay the established fee with application for approval or re-
approval. 
 
4. The EMS Agency shall notify the applicant within thirty (30) days that the 
application was received and specify missing information, if any. Failure 
to submit missing information within thirty (30) calendar days of EMS 
Agency notification will result in denial of the program. 
 
5. The EMS Agency shall notify the applicant in writing within sixty (60) days 
from the receipt of a complete application of the decision to approve or 
deny. The application is only considered for approval if it is complete, and 
all requirements are met. 
 
6. The EMS Agency may deny an application for cause as specified in 
subsection I.C.2. 
 
C. Denial/Revocation/Probation of a Training Program 
 
1. The EMS Agency may, for cause: 
 
a. Deny any training program application. 
 
b. Revoke training program approval. 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 4 OF 9 
 
c. Place training program on probation. 
 
2. Causes for these actions include, but are not limited to the following: 
 
a. Violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting 
in or abetting the violation of, or conspiring to violate any of the 
terms of the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 1.5; 
the California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, EMSA 
Guideline #170; or Los Angeles County Emergency Medical 
Services Prehospital Care Policies. 
 
b. Failure to correct identified deficiencies within the specified length 
of time after receiving written notices from the EMS Agency. 
 
c. Misrepresentation of any fact by a training program of any 
required information. 
 
3. The EMS Agency may take such action(s) as it deems appropriate after 
giving written notice and specifying the reason(s) for denial, revocation, or 
probation. 
 
4. If program approval is revoked, training provided after the date of action 
shall be invalid. 
 
5. A training program is ineligible to reapply for approval following a denial 
or revocation for a minimum of six (6) months. 
 
6. If a training program is placed on probation, the terms of probation, 
including approval of an appropriate corrective action plan, shall be 
determined by the EMS Agency. During the probationary period, prior 
approval of all courses offered must be obtained. Course documents 
must be submitted to the EMS Agency at least thirty (30) days prior to 
each course being offered. Written notification of course approval shall be 
sent to the training program within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the 
request. Renewal of the training program approval is contingent upon 
completion of the probationary period. 
 
D. Notification 
 
The EMS Agency shall notify the California EMS Authority of each training 
program approved, denied, or revoked within their jurisdiction within thirty (30) 
days of action. 
 
II. TRAINING PROGRAM RENEWAL 
 
A. PSFA and BTCC Training Programs shall be renewed if the training program 
applies for renewal and demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this 
policy. 
 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 5 OF 9 
B. The training program must submit a complete application packet for renewal sixty 
(60) calendar days prior to the expiration date in order to maintain continuous 
training program approval. 
 
III. TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS 
 
A. Approved training programs shall ensure that: 
 
1. The content of all PSFA and/or BTCC training is relevant, enhances the 
practice of prehospital emergency medical care, and is related to the 
knowledge base or technical skills required for the practice of PSFA 
and/or BTCC. 
 
2. All records are maintained as outlined in this policy. 
 
3. The EMS Agency is notified within thirty (30) calendar days of any 
request for change in training program name, address, telephone 
number, or program director. 
 
4. All records are available to the EMS Agency upon request. 
 
5. The training program is in compliance with all policies and procedures. 
 
B. A training program may be subject to scheduled site visits by the EMS Agency 
for program audits. 
 
C. Individual classes/courses are open for scheduled or unscheduled 
visits/educational audits by the EMS Agency and/or the local EMS Agency in 
whose jurisdiction the course is conducted. 
 
IV. TRAINING PROGRAM STAFF REQUIREMENTS 
 
Each training program shall designate a program director and instructor(s) who meet the 
requirements. Nothing in this section precludes the same individual from being 
responsible for more than one function. 
 
A. Program Director 
 
Each training program shall have an approved program director that shall provide 
administrative direction and is qualified by education and experience in 
instructional development, instructional methodology, materials, and evaluation 
of instruction. 
 
1. Program director’s qualifications by education and experience shall be 
documented by 40 hours of training in teaching methodology such as: 
 
a. Four (4) semester units of upper division credit in educational 
materials, methods and curriculum development or equivalent; OR 
 
b. California State Fire Marshall (CSFM) “Instructor I and II”; OR 
 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 6 OF 9 
c. National Association of EMS Educators (NAEMSE) “Level I 
Instructor Course”; OR 
 
d. POST Academy Instructor Certificate Program – Level 1. 
 
NOTE:  New program requests shall meet this requirement upon 
submission of application for approval. Current approved programs may 
receive provisional status up to one year to meet this requirement with 
approval for change in personnel. 
 
2. The duties of the program director shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Administering the PSFA and/or BTCC program and ensuring 
adherence to state regulations, guidelines, and established EMS 
Agency policies. 
 
b. Approving all methods of evaluation. 
 
c. Approving instructor(s). 
 
d. Signing all course completion records and maintaining those 
records in a manner consistent with this policy. 
 
e. Attending the mandatory EMS Agency Orientation Program within 
six (6) months of approval as the program director. 
 
f. Attending all mandatory PSFA and/or BTCC program updates. 
 
g. Act as a liaison to the EMS Agency. 
 
B. Instructor 
 
Each training program shall submit instructors for approval by the EMS Agency 
as qualified to teach the topics assigned. 
 
1. Instructor qualifications shall be based on one of the following: 
 
a. Currently licensed or certified in their area of expertise, OR 
 
b. Have evidence of specialized training which may include, but is 
not limited to, a certificate of training or advanced education in a 
given subject area, OR 
 
c. Have at least one (1) year of experience, within the last two (2) 
years, in the specialized area in which they are teaching; OR 
 
d. Be knowledgeable, skilled, and current in the subject matter of the 
course or activity. 
  

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 7 OF 9 
 
VII. CO-SPONSORING A COURSE 
 
When two or more PSFA and/or BTCC training programs co-sponsor a course, only one 
approved training program provider shall be used for that course, and that program 
assumes the responsibility for all training requirements. 
 
X. EDUCATION ATTENDANCE RECORD 
 
A. An Education Attendance Record must be completed for all training provided.  
Each student must sign an attendance record or register online in order to 
receive credit. 
 
B. The information on the Education Attendance Record must contain all the 
elements set forth in the PSFA and BTCC training program application packet. 
 
C.  Attendees shall sign in or register only for themselves. Signing for another 
individual is strictly prohibited and subject to action. 
 
D. The original Education Attendance Record shall be maintained by the program. A 
legible copy (unless the original is requested) of the attendance records shall be 
submitted to the Office of Program Approvals within fourteen (14) days of a 
request unless a specific time frame is specified by the EMS Agency. 
 
XI. COURSE COMPLETION CERTIFICATES AND DOCUMENTS 
 
Programs shall issue a tamper resistant document (method determined by the training 
program) that contains all the elements set forth in the training program application 
packet as proof of successful completion of a course within thirty (30) calendar days. 
 
XII. RECORD KEEPING 
 
Each training program shall maintain the following records on file: 
 
A. Original written and skills performance evaluation and answer key 
 
B. Course Schedule 
 
C. Education Attendance Record 
 
D. Curriculum vitae or resume from each instructor providing the course, class or 
activity, and verification that the instructor is qualified to teach the topics 
assigned, or have evidence of specialized training which may include, but is not 
limited to, a certificate of training or an advanced degree in a given subject, or 
have at least one year of experience within the last two years in the specialized 
area in which they are teaching, or be knowledgeable, skillful and current in the 
subject matter of the course, class or activity. 
 
E. Copies of all program materials and handouts provided 
 
F. Original or summary of performance evaluations administered 
 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 8 OF 9 
G. Documentation of course completion certificates issued 
 
H. All records shall be maintained for four (4) years 
 
I. All records must be available when audits are conducted or upon request 
 
 
XIII. CURRICULUM APPROVAL 
 
An individual or organization may request PSFA and/or BTCC curriculum approval. 
Curriculum approval does not authorize an individual or organization to conduct PSFA 
and/or BTCC training. 
 
A. Any individual or organization, public or private, interested in requesting approval 
for PSFA and/or BTCC curriculum only shall submit: 
 
1. A letter or memo, signed by the individual or Chief of an organization 
which: 
 
a. requests approval of PSFA and/or BTCC curriculum. 
 
b. acknowledges the approval is for the curriculum only and not 
authorization to conduct training as a training program; and 
 
c. identifies that an individual or organization which desires to utilize 
this curriculum, if it is approved, will be notified of the EMS Agency 
requirement to apply for PSFA and/or BTCC training program 
approval. 
 
2. A complete curriculum, as identified in the EMS Agency checklist, 
meeting the requirements set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 
22, Chapter 1.5 and/or EMSA Guideline #170 to include but not limited to: 
 
a. Course schedule: 
 
i. PSFA - Initial: 21 hours and Retraining: 8 hours and/or 
 
ii. BTCC - 4 hours 
 
b. Instructional objectives 
 
c. Lessons/training 
 
d. Written and skills performance evaluations with: 
 
i. Answer key 
 
ii. Passing criteria 
 
e. CPR training is equivalent to BLS for the Healthcare Provider 
(American Heart Association) or Professional Rescuer (American 
Red Cross) 

SUBJECT: PUBLIC SAFETY-FIRST AID (PSFA) AND 
 BASIC TACTICAL CASUALTY CARE (BTCC) 
 TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 911 
 
PAGE 9 OF 9 
 
B. Curriculum approval may be granted up to four (4) years from the last day of the 
month in which the request is approved.  This approval is not transferable from 
person to person or organization to organization. 
 
C. EMS Agency shall be notified of curriculum changes and a request for re-
approval shall be required for changes in medical practice or regulation. 
 
D. The EMS Agency shall notify the applicant in writing within sixty (60) days from 
the receipt of a complete curriculum request of the decision to approve or deny.  
The curriculum request is only considered for approval if it is complete, and all 
requirements are met.  
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 504, Trauma Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 840, Medical Support During Tactical Operations 
 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency, PSFA and BTCC Training Program Application Packet 
 
California EMS Authority, Training Standards for Basic Tactical Casualty Care and Coordination 
with EMS during Terrorism Incidents, 2016 (EMSA #170)
