# 1018990 510 4 01 17 00000002

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT-I, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: PEDIATRIC PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 510 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 05-01-85 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure that 9-1-1 pediatric patients are transported to the most appropriate 
facility that is staffed, equipped, and prepared to administer emergency and/or 
definitive care appropriate to the needs of the pediatric patient. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 13, Section 1105 C 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Brief Resolved Unexplained Event (BRUE): A brief episode characterized by any one of the 
following (for children 12 months of age or younger): absent, decreased, or irregular breathing; 
color change (usually cyanosis or pallor); marked change in muscle tone (usually limpness or 
hypotonia, may also include hypertonia); and/or altered level of responsiveness. 
 
Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP): A licensed basic or 
comprehensive emergency department that is designated by the Emergency Medical Services 
(EMS) Agency to receive pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system.  
 
Newly Born: Refers to patients from birth to two hours after birth. 
 
Pediatric Medical Center (PMC): A licensed acute care hospital that is designated by the EMS 
Agency to receive critically ill pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system based on guidelines 
outlined in this policy. These centers also provide referral services for critically ill pediatric 
patients. 
 
Pediatric Patient: Children 14 years of age or younger. 
 
Pediatric Trauma Center (PTC): A licensed acute care hospital that is designated by the EMS 
Agency to receive critically injured pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system based on guidelines 
outlined in this policy. These centers provide tertiary-level pediatric care and serve as referral 
centers for critically injured pediatric patients. 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
In all cases, the health and well-being of the patient is the overriding consideration in 
determining patient destination. Factors to be considered include severity and stability of the 
patient’s illness or injury; current status of the pediatric receiving facility; anticipated transport 
time; request by the patient, family, guardian or physician; and EMS personnel and base 
hospital judgment. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Guidelines for transporting pediatric patients to a specialty care center (i.e., EDAP, PMC, 
PTC, Perinatal, Sexual Assault Response Team Center, or Trauma Center): 

SUBJECT: PEDIATRIC PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 510 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
A. Patients who require transport, and do not meet guidelines for transport to a 
PMC or PTC should be transported to the most accessible EDAP. 
 
1. Newly born patient requiring assisted ventilation and/or chest 
compression should be transported to the most accessible EDAP that is 
also a Perinatal Center with a NICU. 
 
2. Newly born patient without distress should be transported to the nearest 
EDAP that is also a Perinatal Center. 
 
B. BLS units shall call for an ALS unit on pediatric patients who meet criteria for 
Base Hospital Contact and ALS Transport as listed in Ref. No. 1200.1, Treatment 
Protocols General Instructions. 
 
C. BLS units shall transport pediatric patients not requiring ALS unit response to the 
most accessible EDAP unless criteria are met for Treat and Refer as outlined in 
Ref. No. 834, Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transportation and Treat and 
Release at Scene. 
 
D. Patients meeting conditions listed in Section II: 
 
1. Should be transported to the most accessible PMC if ground transport is 
≤30 minutes. 
 
2. If ground transport time to a PMC is >30 minutes, the patient may be 
transported to the most accessible EDAP. 
 
E. Patients meeting trauma criteria/guidelines as per Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage: 
 
1. Should be transported to the most accessible PTC if the transport time is 
≤30 minutes. 
 
2. If a PTC cannot be accessed but a trauma center can be accessed under 
the parameter in (E.1), the patient may be transported to the trauma 
center. 
 
3. If a PTC or trauma center cannot be accessed as specified above, the 
patient may be transported to the most accessible PMC, or if >30 minutes 
to the closet EDAP. 
 
F. Pediatric patients who have an uncontrollable, life-threatening situation (e.g., 
unmanageable airway or uncontrollable hemorrhage) should be transported to 
the most accessible EDAP. 
 
G. Pediatric patients may be transported to a non-EDAP provided all of the following 
are met: 
 
1. The patient, family, or private physician requests transport to a non-EDAP 
facility. 
 
2. The patient, family, or private physician is made aware that the receiving 
facility is not an EDAP and may not meet current EDAP standards. 

SUBJECT: PEDIATRIC PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 510 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
3. The base hospital concurs and contacts the requested facility and 
ensures that the facility has agreed to accept the patient. 
 
4. All of the above shall be documented on the Patient Care Record. 
 
II. Critically ill pediatric patients exhibiting conditions listed below should be transported to 
a PMC: 
 
A. Cardiac dysrhythmia 
 
B. Severe respiratory distress 
 
C. Cyanosis 
 
D. Altered mental status without signs of improvement 
 
E. Status epilepticus 
 
F. Brief Resolved Unexplained Event (BRUE) ≤12 months of age 
 
G. Focal neurologic signs not associated with trauma (e.g.; pediatric stroke, atypical 
migraine, petit mal seizures) 
 
H. Post cardiopulmonary arrest in whom return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) 
is achieved 
 
 
IV: For multi-casualty incidents see Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty 
Incidents, for destination. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 316, EDAP Standards 
Ref. No. 318, Pediatric Medical Care (PMC) Standards 
Ref. No. 324, Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) Standards 
Ref. No. 501, 9-1-1 Receiving Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 504, Trauma Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 508, Sexual Assault Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 508.1, SART Center Roster 
Ref. No. 511, Perinatal Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 512, Burn Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 516,  Cardiac Arrest Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 816, Physician at Scene 
Ref. No. 832, Treatment/Transport of Minors 
Ref. No. 834, Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport and Treat and Release at Scene 
Ref. No. 1200.1, Treatment Protocols General Instructions
