# 1020361 518 4 1 2017

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDICS, MICN) 
SUBJECT: DECOMPRESSION EMERGENCIES/ REFERENCE NO. 518 
PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-01-88 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-22 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide a procedure for transporting patients with potential decompression 
emergencies to the most appropriate and accessible medical facility. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Provider Agency, Base Hospital and the Medic Alert Center shall follow the procedures 
outlined in the sections specific to their role. 
 
2. Patient destination for patients with decompression emergencies shall be determined by 
the hyperbaric chamber physician on-call with an exception as specified in Policy I.D. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibilities of the Provider Agency: 
 
A. Contact assigned base hospital for any patient suspected of having a 
decompression emergency. 
 
B. Obtain dive incident history of the patient and dive partner, if possible. This 
includes: 
 
1. Maximum dive depth 
 
2. Time spent at depth 
 
3. Rate of ascent 
 
4. Number of dives 
 
5. Surface interval 
 
6. Gas(es) used 
 
C. Coordinate patient transportation to the appropriate receiving facility. 
 
Transportation of patients with potential decompression emergencies may 
involve the United States Coast Guard (USCG) helicopter which does not include 
paramedic level staffing. In some circumstances, the USCG helicopter may be 
able to accommodate a Los Angeles County paramedic to accompany the 
patient to the receiving facility. If this is not possible and rapid transport is in the 
best interest of the patient, care may be transferred from the paramedics 
handling the call to the USCG medical personnel. 
 

SUBJECT: DECOMPRESSION EMERGENCIES/ REFERENCE NO. 518 
PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
D. In rare instances, EMTs may determine destination to the Catalina Hyperbaric 
Chamber when ALS level of care is not immediately available in remote locations 
(e.g., offshore oil and gas platforms), and patient is found either unconscious, 
apneic, pulseless, or exhibiting symptoms of suspected decompression illness 
due to premature ascent and failure to complete required underwater 
decompression stops. In such cases, notification shall be made by the on-scene 
personnel (or notification relayed by US Coast Guard directly to the Catalina 
Hyperbaric Chamber) as follows: 
 
1. Catalina Hyperbaric Chamber at (310) 510-1053 
 
2. Los Angeles County Baywatch Isthmus lifeguard paramedics (if not 
already aware of the incident) 
 
3. Medical Alert Center (MAC) 
 
E. Retrieve patient’s dive equipment (e.g., dive computer, regulator, tank, buoyancy 
compensator, gauges and weight belt) and transport with patient. If the 
transporting unit cannot accommodate the equipment, the provider agency shall 
take custody of it and notify the receiving facility of the dive equipment location. 
 
As a general rule, the integrity of the dive equipment should be maintained and 
not tampered with except by investigating authorities. 
 
II. Responsibilities of the Base Hospital Physician or Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN): 
 
A. Contact the Medical Alert Center (MAC) by dialing the general number  
(866) 940-4401; select Option 1 for emergency or consultation.  The MAC will 
arrange a call between the hyperbaric chamber physician on call and the base 
hospital. If the hyperbaric physician has not responded within 10 minutes, the 
base hospital should re-contact the MAC. 
 
B. Provide medical orders for patient care. 
 
C. In consultation with the hyperbaric chamber physician on call (arranged through 
the MAC), determine if the patient should be transported directly from the 
incident location to a hyperbaric chamber or to the most accessible receiving 
facility (MAR). The following guidelines should be considered for any patient with 
a history of recent underwater compressed gas use: 
 
1. Transport to a MAC-listed hyperbaric chamber (Immediate): 
 
a. Unconscious, or 
 
b. Apneic, or 
 
c. Pulseless; or 
 
d. Premature ascent with reported failure to complete any required 
underwater decompression stop(s) (omitted decompression) with 
or without symptoms. 
 

SUBJECT: DECOMPRESSION EMERGENCIES/ REFERENCE NO. 518 
PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
2. Transport to a MAC-listed hyperbaric chamber or the MAR after 
consultation with the hyperbaric chamber physician (Emergent): 
 
a. Any neurological symptoms, or 
 
b. Severe dyspnea, or 
 
c. Chest discomfort 
 
3. Transport to the MAR with potential secondary transfer to a hyperbaric 
chamber after consultation with the hyperbaric chamber physician (Non-
Emergent): 
 
a. Delayed symptoms after flying, or 
 
b. Delayed minor symptoms after 24 hours 
 
4. Patient destination for patients with decompression emergencies shall be 
determined by the hyperbaric chamber physician on call. 
 
III. Responsibilities of the MAC: 
 
A. Contact the hyperbaric chamber physician on call at LAC+USC Medical Center 
and arrange communications between the physician and the base hospital 
directing the call. If there has been no response from the LAC+USC hyperbaric 
physician within 10 minutes, the MAC will call the next hyperbaric physician on 
the list. 
 
B. Following consultation with the hyperbaric physician on call, determine which 
hyperbaric chamber is most appropriate to the needs of the patient. Factors to be 
considered include distance; altitude; weather; ETA of available transportation; 
the limitations of various aircraft; and the condition of the patient. 
 
C. Inform the appropriate receiving facility of the patient’s condition and ETA. 
 
D. Coordinate the hyperbaric chamber personnel’s transportation to the chamber. 
 
E. Coordinate secondary transfers from the receiving facility as needed. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 516, Cardiac Arrest Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field
