# 1021764 201 7 1 17

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
  (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PREHOSPITAL CARE REFERENCE NO. 201 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 04-30-98  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-22 
 
  
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for prospective, concurrent and retrospective medical 
management of the emergency medical services (EMS) system in Los Angeles 
County by the EMS Agency, hospitals, and provider agencies. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.176, 1797.220 and 1798(a) 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 100091.04, 100096.01 - .03  
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
Hospital Preparedness Program (HPP) Agreement 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Medical management consists of three components: 
 
Prospective: Prior to delivery of patient care – off-line medical direction that uses scientific 
principles and practice standards to establish training objectives, and curriculum 
development for the standardization of patient care. 
 
Concurrent: During delivery of patient care – on-line or on-scene medical direction of 
prehospital personnel caring for patients in the field. This allows for 
individualization of patient care and the ability to ensure optimal use of system 
resources through direct communication or observation. 
 
Retrospective: Following delivery of patient care – off-line medical direction composed of field 
care audits and case reviews for the purpose of ensuring quality improvement. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Medical management provides the framework and authorization for EMS personnel to 
provide emergency treatment outside the hospital. It implies that there is accountability 
throughout the planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the EMS system and 
requires a collaborative effort among all system participants. Medical management is based 
upon national, state, and community standards of care. 
 
2. The EMS Agency, base hospitals, and provider agencies are responsible for ensuring that 
EMS personnel have experience in and knowledge of local EMS agency policies, 
procedures, and guidelines. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Prospective Medical Management 
 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PREHOSPITAL CARE REFERENCE NO. 201 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
A. The Medical Director of the EMS Agency shall ensure the development, 
implementation, and revision of written treatment protocols, medical policies and 
procedures including but not limited to: 
 
1. Medical Control Guidelines 
 
2. Treatment Protocols 
 
3. Base hospital contact and destination guidelines 
 
4. Local EMT scope of practice 
 
5. Local paramedic scope of practice and accreditation requirements 
 
6. Policies for the initiation, completion, review, evaluation, and retention of patient 
care records. 
 
B. Base hospitals shall maintain written agreements with the EMS Agency indicating 
concurrence with the requirements of the EMS Agency’s policies and procedures. 
 
C. Provider agencies shall comply with applicable agreements, State and local policies 
and procedures specified in the Prehospital Care Manual. 
 
II. Concurrent Medical Management 
 
A. The EMS Agency shall ensure that a communication system is in place to allow for 
direct voice communication between paramedics, their assigned base hospital, and 
the Los Angeles County Medical Alert Center. 
 
B. Base hospitals shall: 
 
1. Maintain telecommunication equipment capable of communicating with ALS 
Units assigned to the hospital. 
 
2. Ensure that a base hospital physician is immediately available for consultation 
when an ALS Unit contacts the base, and that either a base hospital physician 
or MICN provides direct voice communication for medical treatment orders 
and/or patient destination or other disposition. 
 
3. Ensure that base hospital physicians and MICNs giving medical direction to 
paramedics are trained in, and have experience in and knowledge of, base 
hospital communications and the local EMS agency policies, procedures, and 
protocols. 
 
4. Use the Los Angeles County Treatment Protocols. Any consistent deviation 
from these protocols must be requested in writing and approved by the 
Medical Director of the EMS Agency. 
 
5. Complete Base Hospital Report Forms approved by the EMS Agency as 
defined in Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care. 
 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PREHOSPITAL CARE REFERENCE NO. 201 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
6. Provide a mechanism to record, retain, and retrieve audio recordings of all 
voice field communications between the base and receiving hospitals and the 
paramedics. 
 
C. Provider agencies shall: 
  
1. Ensure that paramedics use and maintain telecommunications with assigned 
base hospitals. 
 
2. Comply with requirements specifically addressed in medical treatment policies 
including, but not limited to, Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al., and 
Ref. No. 1300, Medical Control Guidelines, et al. 
 
3. Ensure that EMS personnel have education and knowledge of local EMS 
agency policies, procedures, and protocols. 
 
4. Complete an EMS patient care record approved by the EMS Agency as 
defined in Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care. 
 
III. Retrospective Medical Management 
 
A. The Medical Director of the EMS Agency shall: 
 
1. Maintain a systemwide quality improvement program that addresses system 
issues and develops standards for prehospital care. 
 
2. Ensure that written records of prehospital care are reviewed on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
3. Ensure that mechanisms are in place to provide organized evaluation of and 
continuing education for EMS personnel, including evaluation of skills 
programs. 
 
4. Maintain a system-wide prehospital care database and make relevant data 
available to system participants. 
 
B. Base hospitals shall: 
 
1. Maintain a quality improvement program approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Participate in the EMS Agency’s quality improvement program to include 
making available relevant records for program monitoring and evaluation. A 
mechanism shall be in place for provider agencies to obtain their respective 
audio communications for review and educational purposes as approved by 
each individual base hospital’s Protected Health Information and Risk 
Management policies. It is recommended that an agreement for release and 
limited use of paramedic base hospital audio recordings be utilized for the 
release of such audio communications (see sample form Ref. No. 201.1). 
Patient confidentiality shall be maintained at all times. 
 
3. Include in the hospital’s quality improvement (QI) plan indicators that, at a 
minimum, include review of the following: 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PREHOSPITAL CARE REFERENCE NO. 201 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
a. Base Hospital Report Forms 
 
b. Paramedic base hospital audio communications between paramedics 
and base hospital physicians and MICNs 
 
4. Collect data on runs when the base hospital is the receiving hospital, including 
ED diagnosis. 
 
5. Provide a continuing education program for prehospital care personnel 
approved by the EMS Agency as defined in Ref. No. 1013, EMS Continuing 
Education (CE) Provider Approval and Program Requirements, which: 
 
a. Complements the continuing education program provided by the 
assigned provider agencies. 
 
b. Demonstrates a relationship between the base hospital’s quality 
improvement program and the continuing education program offered. 
 
6. Develop an internal system of documentation for audio communications and 
records reviewed, actions recommended and/or taken, and problem 
resolution. 
 
7. Participate in the EMS Agency’s countywide data collection program. 
 
C. Provider Agencies shall: 
 
1. Maintain a quality improvement program approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Participate in the EMS Agency’s quality improvement program to include 
making available relevant records for program monitoring and evaluation. As 
part of the QI program, provider agencies may obtain copies of their 
respective audio paramedic communications from base hospitals for review 
and educational purposes provided that they have developed a written plan for 
security and confidentiality. 
 
3. Include in the provider agency’s QI plan, indicators that, at a minimum, include 
review of EMS patient care records that are: 
 
a. Completed by EMTs and/or paramedics on patients for whom either a 
paramedic unit was not dispatched, was canceled, or transport by 
ambulance did not occur. 
 
b. Completed by EMTs and/or paramedics on patients for whom no base 
contact was made, when indicated by provider impression, treatment 
protocol or medical control guideline, but the patient was transported 
by ambulance. 
 
c. Completed by EMTs and/or paramedics on patients for whom neither 
base hospital contact nor transport occurred when indicated by 
provider impression, treatment protocol or medical control guideline 
 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF PREHOSPITAL CARE REFERENCE NO. 201 
 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
4. Develop an internal system of documentation for EMS patient care records 
and records reviewed, actions recommended and/or taken and resolution of 
problems. 
 
5. Participate in the EMS Agency’s countywide data collection program as 
described in Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care, Ref. No. 607, 
Electronic Submission of Prehospital Data, and Ref. No. 608, Retention and 
Disposition of the Prehospital Care Patient Care Records. 
 
6. Provider agencies that have a continuing education program approved by the 
EMS Agency shall: 
 
a. Demonstrates a relationship between the provider agency’s quality 
improvement program and the continuing education offered. 
 
b. Ensures ongoing clinical competency and skill maintenance of EMS 
clinicians. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 201.1,  Sample Agreement for Release and Limited Use of Paramedic Base Hospital 
  Audio Recordings 
Ref. No. 214 Base Hospital and Provider Agency Reporting Responsibilities 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 607, Electronic Submission of Prehospital Data 
Ref. No. 608, Retention and Disposition of the Prehospital Care Patient Care Records 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program (EQIP) 
Ref. No. 1013, Prehospital Continuing Education (CE) Provider Approval and Program  
  Requirements 
Ref. Nos. 1200, Los Angeles County Treatment Protocols 
Ref. Nos. 1300, Medical Control Guideline
