# 1027671 Ref316

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES     
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   
 
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
EFFECTIVE: 1985 PAGE 1 OF 18 
REVISED:  07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ _________________________________ 
 Director, EMS Agency    Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish minimum standards for the designation of Emergency Departments 
Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP).  These Emergency Departments (ED) provide 
care to pediatric patients by meeting specific requirements for professional staff, 
quality improvement, education, support services, equipment, supplies, 
medications, and established policies and procedures. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 14 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Board Certified (BC): Successful completion of the evaluation process through one of the 
Member Boards of the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) or American Osteopathic 
Association (AOA), including an examination designed to assess the knowledge, skills, and 
experience necessary to provide quality patient care in a particular specialty. 
 
Board Eligible (BE): Successful completion of a residency training program with progression to 
board certification based on the timeframe as specified by the ABMS or AOA. 
 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children 
(CSEC) refers to any range of crimes and activities involving the sexual abuse or exploitation of 
a child for the financial benefit of any person or in exchange for anything of value (including 
monetary and non-monetary benefits) given or received by any person. 
https://dcfs.lacounty.gov/youth/sexual-exploitation/ 
  
Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS): A mandated component of Emergency 
Response Services, administered by the Los Angeles County Department of Children and  
Family Services. The Child Protection Hotline (CPH), 800-540-4000, intake evaluation staff is 
responsible for assessing any referral, whether verbal or written, which alleges child abuse, 
neglect, sexual assault, or exploitation, which includes commercial sexual exploitation and 
human trafficking, to determine whether an in-person investigation and consultation is required. 
 
Designated Pediatric Consultant: a qualified specialist in pediatrics and/or pediatric 
subspecialty. 
 
Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP): A licensed basic or 
comprehensive ED that is designated by the Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services 
(EMS) Agency to receive pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system. These EDs provide care to 
pediatric patients by meeting specific requirements for professional staff, quality improvement, 
education, support services, equipment, supplies, medications, and established policies and 
procedures. 
 
EDAP Medical Director: A qualified specialist in Emergency Medicine (EM) or Pediatric 
Emergency Medicine (PEM), also referred to as the Physician Pediatric Emergency Care 
Coordinator. 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 2 OF 18 
 
Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (ENPC): Two-day course developed by the Emergency 
Nurses Association (ENA) provides core-level pediatric knowledge and psychomotor skills 
needed to care for pediatric patients in the emergency care setting. 
 
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS): Pediatric resuscitation course that is recognized by 
the EMS Agency and valid for two years (e.g., American Heart Association, American Red 
Cross). 
 
Pediatric Advisory Committee (PedAC): Acts in an advisory capacity to the EMS Agency and 
is responsible for all matters regarding pediatric care and policy development pertinent to the 
practice, operation, and administration of prehospital care, emergency departments, and 
pediatric intensive care units (PICU).  The committee reviews, evaluates and makes 
recommendations on EMS issues impacting the pediatric population. 
 
Pediatric Emergency Course (PEC): Two-day course, with topics pre-approved by the EMS 
Agency, that provides knowledge about the acutely ill and injured child, and a minimum of 14 
hours of Board of Registered Nursing (BRN) approved continuing education. 
 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine (PEM): A qualified specialist with a subspecialty in pediatrics 
to provide and manage emergency care in acutely ill or injured infants and children.  
 
Pediatric Intensivist: A qualified specialist in Pediatric Critical Care. 
 
Pediatric Liaison Nurse (PdLN): A Registered Nurse currently licensed to practice in the State 
of California and appointed by the hospital to coordinate pediatric emergency care, also referred 
to as Nurse Pediatric Emergency Care Coordinator (PECC). 
 
Pediatric Medical Center (PMC): A licensed acute care hospital that is designated by the EMS 
Agency to receive critically ill pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system based on guidelines 
outlined in Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination. 
 
Pediatric Patient: In the prehospital setting, is a child who is 14 years of age or younger. 
 
Pediatric Trauma Center (PTC): A licensed acute care hospital that is designated by the EMS 
Agency to receive injured pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system based on guidelines outlined 
in Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage. These centers provide tertiary pediatric care and serve as 
referral centers for critically injured pediatric patients. 
 
Promptly Available: Able to be physically present in the ED within a period of time that is 
medically prudent and appropriate to the patient's clinical condition; and further, should not have 
a measurable harmful effect on the course of patient management or outcome. Hospital 
guidelines shall be established that address response time for on-call physicians.  
 
Qualified Specialist: A physician licensed in the State of California who has become BC or BE 
in the corresponding specialty by ABMS or AOA. 
 
Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) Centers: A center specializing in forensic 
examinations in the case of an acute sexual assault/abuse event (defined as occurring within 
120 hours), which has the capabilities of providing comprehensive medical and psychological 
forensic examinations and consist of a knowledgeable staff whose training, expertise, and state-
of-the-art equipment exceeds the community standards. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 3 OF 18 
Telehealth: The remote delivery of health care services and clinical information using 
telecommunications technology. This includes a wide array of clinical services using internet, 
wireless, satellite, and telephone media. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. EDAP Designation / Re-Designation 
 
A. EDAP initial designation and EDAP re-designation is granted for a period of three 
years after a satisfactory review by the EMS Agency. 
 
B. The EMS Agency reserves the right to perform scheduled site visits or request 
additional data of the EDAP at any time. 
 
C. The EDAP shall immediately provide written notice to the Director of the EMS 
Agency if unable to adhere to any of the provisions set forth in the EDAP 
Standards, including structural changes, relocation of ED and change in pediatric 
inpatient resources. 
 
D. The EDAP shall provide a 90-day, written notice to the EMS Agency Director of 
intent to withdraw from the EDAP program. 
 
E. The EDAP shall notify the EMS Agency within 15 days, in writing of any change 
in status of the EDAP Medical Director, ED Nurse Manager/Director, Designated 
Pediatric Consultant, or Pediatric Liaison Nurse (PdLN) by submitting the 
Notification of Personnel Change Form (Ref. No. 621.2). 
 
F. Execute and maintain a Specialty Care Center EDAP Designation Agreement 
with the EMS Agency. 
 
II. General Hospital Requirements 
 
A. Licensed by the State of California Department of Public Health (CDPH) as a 
General Acute Care Hospital, and maintain: 
 
1. A special permit for Basic or Comprehensive Emergency Medical Service; 
and 
 
2. Accreditation from a Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) 
recognized Hospital Accreditation Organization. 
 
B. Shall appoint an EDAP Medical Director who will be provided non-clinical time to 
perform duties based on the ED’s annual pediatric volume 
1. Low  <1,800  
 
2. Medium 1,800 – 4,999  
 
3. Medium-High 5,000 – 9,999  
 
4. High  >10,000 highly recommend 50% FTE) 
 
C. Shall appoint a PdLN and provide non-clinical time to perform duties based upon 
the ED’s annual pediatric volume: 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 4 OF 18 
 
1. Low  <1,800 (10% FTE or 4 hours/ week) 
 
2. Medium 1,800 – 4,999 (25% FTE or 10 hours/ week) 
 
3. Medium-High 5,000 – 9,999 (50% FTE or 20 hours/week) 
 
4. High  >10,000 (a minimum of 50% FTE but highly recommend 1 
full time equivalent) 
 
D. Hospital shall have a mechanism to track and monitor pediatric continuing 
education, including PALS, of pertinent staff. 
 
E. Pediatric Interfacility Transfer 
 
Establish and maintain a written Interfacility Consultation and Transfer 
Agreement for tertiary or specialty care, which shall include, at a minimum, the 
following: 
 
1. A plan for subspecialty consultation (telehealth or on-site) 24 hours per 
day. 
 
2. Identification of transferring and receiving hospitals’ responsibilities in 
accordance with Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act 
(EMTALA). 
 
3. A process for selecting the appropriately staffed transport service to 
match the patient’s acuity level. 
 
III. EDAP Leadership Requirements 
 
A. EDAP Medical Director 
 
1. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Oversee EDAP quality improvement (QI) program and monitor to 
ensure adherence to the EDAP standards. 
 
b. Promote and verify adequate skills and current knowledge of ED 
staff physicians and mid-level practitioners in pediatric emergency 
care and resuscitation. 
 
c. Participate in a multidisciplinary ED and pediatric committees (if 
applicable) to ensure that pediatric care needs are addressed and 
communicated across disciplines. 
 
d. Liaison with PMCs, PTCs, other hospitals, prehospital care 
providers, and the EMS Agency to ensure pediatric care needs 
are addressed. 
 
e. Collaborate with the ED Nurse Manager/Director and the PdLN to 
ensure adherence to the EDAP standards for staffing, medication, 
equipment, supplies, and other resources for children in the ED. 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 5 OF 18 
 
f. Participate in EMS Agency activities and meetings and attend a 
minimum of two (2) PedAC meetings per year. 
 
B. Designated Pediatric Consultant 
 
1. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Promptly available for consultation 
 
b. Participate in the development and monitoring of pediatric QI 
program, and pediatric policies and procedures 
 
c. Collaborate with the EDAP Medical Director and PdLN as needed 
 
d. May also be the EDAP Medical Director 
 
C. ED Nurse Manager/Director 
 
Responsibility: provide organizational oversite and support to meet EDAP 
requirements and initiatives 
 
D. Pediatric Liaison Nurse (PdLN)  
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. At least two years of experience working in pediatrics, or in an ED 
that provides care for pediatric patients, within the previous five 
years; and currently working for the ED. 
 
b. Current PALS provider or instructor certification. 
 
c. Completion of a two-day PEC or ENPC every four years. 
 
d. Completion of seven hours of BRN approved pediatric continuing 
education (CE) every two years. 
 
2. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Collaborate with the EDAP Medical Director, ED Nurse 
Manager/Director, and Designated Pediatric Consultant to ensure 
compliance with the EDAP Standards, and policies and 
procedures established by the EMS Agency. 
 
b. Implement, maintain, and monitor the EDAP QI program. 
 
c. Serve as a liaison and maintain effective lines of communication 
with: 
 
1) ED management, physicians, and personnel 
2) Hospital pediatric management, physicians, and personnel 
3) System PdLNs 
4) Other EDAPs and PMCs 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 6 OF 18 
5) Prehospital care coordinators (PCCs), as needed, to follow 
up with pediatric treatment/transport concerns 
6) EMS providers as needed, to follow up with pediatric 
treatment and/or transport concerns 
7) EMS Agency 
 
d. Serve as a contact person for the EMS Agency and be available 
upon request to respond to County business. 
 
e. Ensure pediatric ED continuing education and competency 
evaluation in pediatrics for ED staff. 
 
f. Participate in EMS Agency activities and meetings and attend a 
minimum of two (2) PedAC meetings per year. 
 
IV. Personnel Requirements 
 
A. ED Physicians 
 
1. All physicians attending in the ED shall be BC, or BE in EM, or PEM.  
 
2. For facilities with a dedicated pediatric ED, physicians who are BE/BC in 
 Pediatrics and in an accredited PEM training program are permitted to 
 attend in the ED once approved by their program and with appropriate 
 supervision/backup from BE/BC physicians defined above. 
 
B. Pediatricians (applies to EDAPs with associated pediatric admission unit) 
 
There shall be a call panel for telephone consultation and a qualified specialist in 
pediatrics to be available to the ED twenty-four hours per day. 
 
C. Pediatric Subspecialty Services 
 
Pediatric subspecialty physicians, to include pediatric intensivist, shall be 
available through in-house call panel, telehealth, or transfer agreements. 
 
D. Advanced Practice Providers (Physician Assistants and Nurse Practitioners) 
 
1. Advanced Practice Providers shall be licensed in the State of California. 
 
2. Advanced Practice Providers assigned to the ED caring for pediatric 
patients must have PALS provider or instructor certification.  
 
E. Registered Nurses 
 
1. All RN staff in the ED caring for pediatric patients must have a current 
PALS provider or instructor certification. 
 
2. All nurses assigned to the ED shall attend at least 14 hours of BRN-
approved pediatric emergency education (not including PALS) every four 
years (e.g., PEC or ENPC). 
 
3. At least one RN per shift shall have completed a two-day PEC within the 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 7 OF 18 
last 4 years and be available for patient care. It is highly recommended 
that all nurses regularly assigned to the ED complete this course. 
 
V. Two-Day PEC – Continuing Education 
 
A. May be completed in-house or off-site. 
 
B. The interval between Day/Part 1 and Day/Part 2 must be completed within a six-
month period. If the interval between Day/Part 1 and Day/Part 2 is greater than 
six months, this will only fulfill the 14-hour requirement in Section IV.E.2 above. 
 
C. Curriculum should be selected from this broad spectrum of pediatric topics which 
have been pre-approved by the EMS Agency: 
 
1. Airway management 
2. Brief Resolved Unexplained Event (BRUE) 
3. Burns 
4. Child maltreatment (suspected child abuse, neglect, commercial sexual 
exploitation, human trafficking, and sexual assault) to include the 
mandated reporting process 
5. Coordination of care with a SART Center for an acute suspected sexual 
assault victim requiring a forensic examination 
6. Death 
7. Disaster preparedness/Disaster management 
8. Fever 
9. Female presenting with signs & symptoms of recent delivery and no 
history of giving birth / newborn abandonment 
10. Human trafficking 
11. Injury prevention 
12. Medical conditions (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, inborn errors of 
metabolism, etc.) 
13. Medication safety 
14. Neonatal resuscitation 
15. Pain management 
16. Disaster management 
17. Poisonings/overdose 
18. Procedural sedation 
19. Respiratory emergencies 
20. Resuscitation 
21. Seizures 
22. Sepsis 
23. Shock / hypotension 
24. SIDS/SUID 
25. Special health care needs 
26. Submersions 
27. Surgical emergencies 
28. Trauma  
29. Triage 
 
VI. Ancillary Services 
 
A. Respiratory Care Practitioners (RCP) 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 8 OF 18 
 
1. At least one RCP shall be in-house twenty-four hours per day to respond 
to the ED. 
 
2. All RCPs that work or respond to the ED shall have a PALS provider or 
instructor certification. 
 
B. Radiology 
 
1. The radiology department shall have pediatric-specific policies and 
procedures pertaining to imaging studies of children and reducing radiation 
exposure. 
 
2. Qualified specialist in radiology must be on-call and promptly available 
twenty-four hours per day. 
 
3. Radiology technician must be in-house twenty-four hours per day. 
 
4. Provide the following services 24 hours per day/seven days per week: 
 
a. Computerized tomography (CT) 
 
b. Ultrasonography 
 
c. Magnetic resonance Imaging (MRI) 
 
C. Laboratory 
 
Laboratory service shall have pediatric-specific policies and procedures 
pertaining to laboratory studies of children, including, but not limited to, obtaining 
samples, and microtechnique for small or limited sample sizes. 
 
VII.  Policies and Procedures 
 
The hospital shall develop and maintain, at minimum, the following policies and 
procedures pertaining to the emergency department care of children, unless specific to 
radiology, laboratory or pharmacy practices. Multiple required elements may be 
incorporated into one policy (e.g., Care of the Pediatric Patient in the ED). All policies 
should be reviewed minimally every three (3) years and reflect current practice.  Any 
reference to weight should be in the form of kilograms. 
 
A. Weight and Vital Sign Measurement: 
 
1. Vital signs shall be obtained and recorded at triage for all children. The 
policy shall include age-appropriate methods to obtain temperature, heart 
rate, respiratory rate, and pain scale. 
 
2. Blood pressure and pulse oximetry monitoring shall be available for 
children of all ages. Optimally, blood pressure and pulse oximetry should 
be assessed on all children and shall be measured on all children 
requiring admission or transfer. Exceptions must be addressed in policy 
and monitored. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 9 OF 18 
3. All pediatric weights shall be obtained and recorded in kilograms upon 
arrival to the ED: 
 
a. For children who require emergency stabilization or those who 
cannot be safely weighed, a standardized length-based 
resuscitation tape, approved by the EMS Agency (e.g., Broselow 
2011A or newer), may be used to estimate weight in kilograms. 
The weight shall be recorded in a prominent place on the medical 
record.  
 
b. Scales used to weigh children must be configured to display 
weights only in kilograms. 
 
c. Electronic medical records shall only allow for weight entries and 
display in kilograms only. 
 
B. Pediatric patient safety in the ED  
 
C. Immunization assessment and management of the under immunized patient 
 
D. Mandated reporting of child maltreatment (suspected child abuse, neglect, 
commercial sexual exploitation, human trafficking, and sexual assault) to include: 
 
1. An immediate, or as soon as practically possible, verbal telephone report 
shall be made to the Child Protection Hotline (CPH). A referral number 
will be provided by the CPH to initiate a “Create Suspected Child Abuse 
Report” online in the Child Abuse Reporting Electronic System (CARES). 
 
a. Suspected Child Abuse Report (SCAR) #8572 report shall be 
submitted online to the DCFS within 36 hours. 
https://mandreptla.org/cars.web/CallType  
 
b. To file the SCAR report electronically, select “Follow-Up 
Suspected Child Abuse Reports (SS8572)”. The Mandated 
Reporter (MR) Number and Tracking Number will be generated, 
and both must be documented in the patient’s medical record. 
 
c. If a “New Non-Emergency Child Abuse/Neglect (CARES) Report” 
was submitted, document the reference number “ER” followed by 
11 digits. 
 
d. If a “Consultation with ARES number” was provided by CPH, 
document the reference number “A” followed by 15 digits. 
 
2. Notify the law enforcement agency in the appropriate jurisdiction where 
the crime occurred. Document the officer’s identification, department, and 
badge number in the medical record. 
 
3. Collaborative discussion with Social Worker, ED Physician,  
and RN prior to the patient being discharged to ensure the patient is 
discharged to the appropriate location or with the appropriate services. 
 
E. A pediatric suspected sexual assault patient requires coordination of care with a 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 10 OF 18 
SART Center. 
 
1. For an acute sexual assault occurring within the last 120 hours an 
immediate forensic evidentiary examination may be required.  
 
2. For a sexual assault that occurred over 120 hours, a referral to a SART 
Center may be appropriate as determined by the forensic examiner.  
  
3. Collaborate with law enforcement to determine a plan of care and/or 
forensic evidentiary examination or referral. 
  
4. The ED may also contact the forensic examiner for consultation or 
clarification regarding patient care as it relates to evidence preservation. 
 
5.         Document appropriate discharge and referral, include the name of the 
SART Center(s), location address, hotline telephone number(s), and to 
whom care was discharged (i.e., law enforcement, family, caregiver, etc.). 
 
F. Pediatric assessment and reassessment include identification of abnormal vital 
 signs according to the age of the patient.  If abnormal values are obtained, 
 include a plan/process for the physician notification. 
 
G. Pain assessment, treatment, and reassessment, utilizing developmentally 
appropriate pain scales (include a description of the tools used for all age levels) 
 
H. Consent and assent for emergency treatment, include situations in which a 
parent/legal guardian is not immediately available 
 
I. Care of the pediatric patient with Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders/ or Physician 
Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) 
 
J. Death of the child in the ED and care of the grieving family 
 
K. Care and safety for the pediatric patient with mental and/or behavioral health 
emergencies 
 
L. Physical and chemical restraint of patients 
 
M. Procedural sedation 
 
N. Safe surrender of newborns, include the following: 
 
1. Signage  
 
2. Procedures for accepting a newborn, including a safe surrender packet 
for the individual relinquishing the newborn 
 
For more information: https://www.cdss.ca.gov/inforesources/Safely-
Surrendered-Baby 
 
O. Daily verification of proper location and function of equipment and supplies for 
the pediatric crash cart with a list and description of all required items in each 
drawer 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 11 OF 18 
 
P. Family Centered Care, include the following: 
 
1. Supporting appropriate family presence during all aspects of care to 
include invasive procedures and resuscitation 
 
2. Education of the patient, family, and regular caregivers 
 
3. Discharge planning and instructions 
 
4. Culturally and linguistically appropriate services 
 
Q. Communication with patient’s medical home or primary provider based on illness 
and severity (e.g., aftercare instructions, x-ray results, laboratory studies, as 
appropriate) 
 
R. Transfer from the ED to another facility 
 
S. Disaster preparedness addressing the following pediatric issues: 
 
1. Minimizing parent-child separation, and methods for reuniting separated 
children with their families 
 
2. Pediatric surge capacity for both injured and non-injured children 
 
3. Medical and mental health therapies, and social services for children in 
the event of a disaster 
 
4. Disaster drills that include a pediatric mass casualty incident at least 
once every two years 
 
5. Decontamination 
 
6. Surge plan for backup personnel (MD and nursing) in the ED 
 
T. Medication safety addressing the following pediatric issues: 
 
1. Medication orders should be written clearly based upon the appropriate 
units per kilogram and include total dose. 
 
2. Processes for prescribing, safe medication storage, and delivery should 
be established.  Include the use of pre-calculated dosing guidelines for 
children of all ages. 
 
3. Involve the patient and family in the medication safety process to ensure 
accurate patient identification. Include patient and family education as to 
the rationale for the medication. 
 
 
 
VIII.  Equipment, Supplies, and Medications  
 
A. Pediatric equipment, supplies, and medications shall be easily accessible, 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 12 OF 18 
labeled, and logically organized.  A mobile pediatric crash cart shall be utilized. 
 
B. A locator chart or grid identifying the locations of all required equipment and 
supplies shall be developed and maintained in order for staff to easily identify 
location of all items. 
 
C. Required EDAP equipment, supplies, and medications 
 
1. General Equipment 
 
a. Weight scale measuring only in kilograms for both infants and 
children 
 
b. Standardized length-base resuscitation tape, approved by the 
EMS Agency (e.g., Broselow 2011A or newer), or other 
standardized method to estimate pediatric weights in kilograms 
 
c. Pediatric drug dosage reference material with dosages calculated 
in milligrams, micrograms, milliequivalents, etc. per kilogram 
(either posted or readily available) 
 
d. Developmentally appropriate pain scale assessment tools for 
infants and children 
 
e. Blood and IV fluid warmer (Rapid infuser) 
 
f. Warming and cooling system with appropriate disposable blankets 
 
g. Restraints in various sizes 
 
2. Monitoring Equipment 
 
a. Blood pressure cuffs 
 
1) Neonatal 
2) Infant 
3) Child 
4) Adult arm 
5) Adult thigh 
 
b. Vascular Doppler device (handheld) 
 
c. ECG monitor/defibrillator 
 
1) ECG electrodes in pediatric and adult sizes 
2) Defibrillator paddles in pediatric and adult sizes, and/or; 
Hands-free defibrillation device 
3) External pacing capability 
4) Multifunction pads in pediatric and adult sizes 
 
d. Thermometer with hypothermia capability  
 
3. Airway Management 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 13 OF 18 
 
a. Bag-Mask-Ventilation (BMV) device with self-inflating bag 
 
1) Infant (minimum 450ml) 
2) Child 
3) Adult 
 
b. BMV clear masks 
 
1) Neonate 
2) Infant 
3) Child 
4) Adult 
 
c. Laryngoscope handle 
 
1) Pediatric 
2) Adult 
 
d. Laryngoscope Blades 
 
1) Macintosh/curved: 2, 3 
2) Miller/straight: 00, 0, 1, 2, 3  
 
e. Endotracheal Tubes 
 
1) Uncuffed: size mm 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, 5.5 
2) Cuffed: size mm 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 
7.5, 8.0 
 
f. Stylets for endotracheal tubes 
 
1) Pediatric 
2) Adult 
 
g. Magill Forceps 
 
1) Pediatric 
2) Adult 
 
h. Continuous end-tidal CO2 monitoring device for pediatric and 
adult patients (preferred). If not available, colorimetric CO2 
detector may be utilized. 
 
i. Pulse oximeter unit with sensors 
 
1) Infant 
2) Pediatric 
3) Adult 
 
j. Nasopharyngeal Airways 
 
1) Infant (sizes 12-14) 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 14 OF 18 
2) Child (sizes 18-28) 
3) Adult (sizes 30-36) 
 
k. Oropharyngeal Airways 
 
1) Infant (size 00) 
2) Child (size 0-2) 
3) Adult (sizes 3-5) 
 
l. Clear oxygen masks  
 
1) Infant 
2) Child 
3) Adult 
 
m. Non-rebreather masks  
 
1) Infant (partial non-rebreather) 
2) Child 
3) Adult 
 
n. Nasal cannulas  
 
1) Infant 
2) Child 
3) Adult 
 
o. Suction catheters  
 
6, 8, 10, 12 Fr 
 
p. Yankauer suction tips   
  
q. Feeding tubes 
 
 5, 8 Fr 
 
r. Nasogastric Tubes 
 
5, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 Fr 
 
s. Supraglottic Airway Devices  
 
1) Neonatal  
2) Infant  
3) Child  
4) Adult  
 
t. Difficult Airway Kit 
 
u. Tracheostomy trays: optional for EDAP, required for PMC 
 
1) Pediatric 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 15 OF 18 
2) Adult  
 
v. Tracheostomy Tubes: optional for EDAP, required for PMC 
 
1) Neonatal: size mm 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5 
2) Pediatric: size mm 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0 
 
4. Vascular Access Equipment 
 
a. Arm boards 
 
1) Infant 
2) Child 
3) Adult 
 
b. IV administration sets with calibrated chambers 
 
c. IV catheters 
 
16, 18, 20, 22, 24 gauge 
 
d. 3-way stopcocks  
 
e. Device or needle to achieve intraosseous (IO) vascular access, to 
include needles in the appropriate sizes for pediatric and adult 
patients 
 
f. IV solutions, 250ml and/or 500ml bags 
 
1) 0.9 NS 
2) D5.45NS 
3) D5NS 
4) D10W 
 
5. Fracture Management Devices  
 
a. Splinting supplies for long bone fractures  
 
b. Cervical spine motion restriction equipment (e.g., cervical collar) 
 
1) Pediatric 
2) Adult 
 
c. Spinal board with the appropriate straps 
 
6. Specialized Trays or Kits  
 
a. Newborn delivery kit to include: 
 
1) Bulb syringe 
2) Umbilical clamps 
3) Towels 
4) Scissors  

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 16 OF 18 
 
b. Newborn initial resuscitation equipment should be readily 
available, include: 
 
1) Radiant warmer or warming mattress 
2) BMV device with self-inflating bag and clear mask for 
newborns 
3) Umbilical vein catheters, or 5.0 Fr feeding tube 
 
c. Thoracostomy tray 
 
d. Chest drainage system 
 
e. Chest tubes (at least one in each size range) 
 
1) Required for EDAP: (10 – 12) (16 – 24) (28 – 40) Fr 
2) Required for PMC: 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 36 Fr  
 
f. Lumbar Puncture trays and spinal needles  
 
1) 22 g, 3 inch 
2) 22-25 g, 1½ inch  
 
g. Urinary catheterization sets and indwelling urinary catheters 
 
5, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16 Fr 
 
7. Pediatric-Specific Resuscitation 
 
a. Immediately available drug calculation resources 
 
b. The following medications must be immediately available: 
 
1) Adenosine 
2) Albuterol 
3) Amiodarone 
4) Atropine 
5) Calcium chloride 
6) Dobutamine 
7) Dopamine 
8) Epinephrine 0.1mg/mL (IV administration) 
9) Epinephrine 1mg/mL (IM administration) 
10) Epinephrine for inhalation 
11) Fentanyl 
12) Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 
13) Ketamine 
14) Lidocaine 
15) Mannitol or hypertonic saline 
16) Naloxone 
17) Norepinephrine 
18) Neuromuscular blocking agent 
19) Procainamide 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 17 OF 18 
20) Sedative agent 
21) Sodium Bicarbonate 4.2% (or a process to obtain the drug 
in an emergency situation) 
22) Sodium Bicarbonate 8.4% 
 
IX. Quality Improvement (QI) Program Requirements 
 
A QI program shall be developed as per Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement 
Program, and monitored by the EDAP Medical Director, ED Nurse Manager/Director, 
and PdLN, with input as needed from the Designated Pediatric Consultant. 
 
A. Develop a methodology to easily identify pediatric (14 years of age and under) 
visits to the ED that can clearly delineate between 9-1-1 transport and self-
transport. 
 
B. Identification and trending of important aspects of pediatric care requiring 
improvement shall include: 
 
1. 100% medical record review by physician and PdLN to include physician 
reviewer’s signature(s) and date(s) of the reviews: 
 
a. Deaths in the ED, including cardiopulmonary arrests 
 
b. Child Maltreatment (suspected child abuse, neglect, commercial 
sexual exploitation, human trafficking, and sexual assault) to 
include the mandated reporting process 
 
c. Transfers to higher level of care 
 
d. Unscheduled/unplanned return visits to the ED within 48 hours 
and are admitted or transferred for continued acute care 
 
2. System-wide QI projects selected by the EMS Agency and endorsed by 
the PedAC. 
 
3. Track and trend two (2) EMS Agency approved indicators, and one (1) 
additional indicator (important aspects of patient care) identified by the 
EDAP Medical Director and PdLN 
 
4. Quarterly QI review of all suspected child maltreatment cases shall be 
conducted by Social Services and the ED to ensure the appropriate 
recognition of child maltreatment and reporting processes have been 
completed. A checklist may be utilized to ensure complete documentation 
and facilitate the review. 
  
C. Submit data as requested by the EMS Agency for quality improvement purposes 
upon request (e.g., EMS Agency Pediatric Database, Cardiac Arrest Registry to 
Enhance Survival (CARES), pediatric patient outcomes, physician reviews).  
 
D. Maintain written QI plan, trending and analysis reports, agendas, minutes, and 
attendance rosters.  Upon request, these records shall be readily available to the 
EMS Agency for review 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT APPROVED REFERENCE NO. 316 
 FOR PEDIATRIC (EDAP) STANDARDS 
 
PAGE 18 OF 18 
E. Complete the National Pediatric Readiness Project (NPRP) assessment annually 
https://www.pedsready.org/, and submit a copy of the NPRP Assessment Gap 
Analysis to the EMS Agency upon request 
 
X. Data Collection Requirements 
 
A. Participate in the data collection process established the EMS Agency.  
 
B. Submit data to the EMS Agency, within 45 days of patient discharge, which shall 
include data elements listed in Ref. No. 652, EDAP and PMC Data Dictionary. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Policy Manual 
 
Ref, No. 216, Pediatric Advisory Committee (PedAC)  
Ref. No. 318, Pediatric Medical Center (PMC) Standards 
Ref. No. 324, SART Center Standards 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program 
Ref. No. 621.2, Notification of Personnel Change Form 
Ref. No. 652, EDAP and PMC Data Dictionary 
Ref. No. 822,  Suspected Child Abuse/Neglect Reporting Guidelines 
Ref. No. 822.2, Suspected Child Abuse Report (SCAR) #8572 
 
California Penal Code 11166 
Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (ENPC) 
National Pediatric Readiness Project (NPRP) 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
The EMS Agency EDAP Standards were first developed by the Committee on Pediatric 
Emergency Medicine (COPEM), which is made up of representatives from the following 
organizations: Los Angeles Pediatric Society, Pediatric Liaison Nurses of Los Angeles County, 
California Chapter of the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), National 
Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) Resource Alliance, American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP)-California Chapter 2, Emergency Nurses Association (ENA), American College 
of Surgeons (ACS), and the EMS Agency.  
 
The EDAP Standards have since been revised, endorsed by The Hospital Association of 
Southern California, and now meet or exceed the 2009 Joint Policy Statement: Guidelines for 
Care of Children in the Emergency Department which was ratified by the AAP, ACEP, and the 
ENA.
