# 1031386 227.1EMSDispatchGuidelines

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT:  DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
EFFECTIVE: 04-18-17 PAGE 1 OF 15 
REVISED: 01-01-2022 
SUPERSEDES: 04-18-17 
DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
BASIC MEDICAL INSTRUCTIONS PROCEDURE ............................................................................. 3 
GENERAL MEDICAL ................................................................................................................................ 3 
AED INSTRUCTIONS ............................................................................................................................... 3 
ALLERGIC REACTION/ANAPHYLAXIS .............................................................................................. 4 
BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS .................................................................................................................... 4 
BITES/STINGS ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
BREATHING PROBLEMS ....................................................................................................................... 5 
BURNS ........................................................................................................................................................ 6 
• Chemical burn ............................................................................................................................... 6 
• Electrical burn ............................................................................................................................... 6 
• Thermal burn ................................................................................................................................. 6 
CARDIAC ARREST: ADULT AND CHILD ............................................................................................ 6 
CARDIAC ARREST: PEDIATRIC (infant from birth to 1 year) ....................................................... 6 
CARDIAC ARREST: NEWBORN ........................................................................................................... 7 
CHILDBIRTH .............................................................................................................................................. 7 
CHOKING: ADULT and CHILD (1-8 years old) .................................................................................. 9 
CHOKING: INFANT (<1 years old) ........................................................................................................ 9 
COLD EXPOSURE .................................................................................................................................. 10 
CONVULSIONS/SEIZURES .................................................................................................................. 10 
DIABETIC PROBLEMS .......................................................................................................................... 11 
EMERGING INFECTIONS (e.g. Ebola) ............................................................................................... 11 
EYE INJURIES ......................................................................................................................................... 11 
HEAT EXPOSURE .................................................................................................................................. 11 
INGESTION/OVERDOSE/POISONING ............................................................................................... 12 
UNCONSCIOUS (including “MAN DOWN”) ..................................................................................... 12 
TRAUMA INSTRUCTIONS .................................................................................................................... 12 
GENERAL TRAUMA ........................................................................................................................... 12
 
ASSAULT .............................................................................................................................................. 13 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 15 
BLEEDING ............................................................................................................................................ 13 
DIVING/DROWNING ........................................................................................................................... 13 
ELECTROCUTION .............................................................................................................................. 14 
PENETRATING INJURY (including GUNSHOT and STAB injuries) ...................................... 14 
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS ............................................................................................................. 14 
CARBON MONOXIDE INHALATION .............................................................................................. 14 
TRAPPED IN CONFINED SPACE (including INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT) ............................... 15 
TRAPPED IN STRUCTURE FIRE .................................................................................................... 15 
TRAPPED IN SUBMERGED VEHICLE ........................................................................................... 15 
 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 15 
This document is a result of review of submitted dispatch protocols to the Los Angeles 
County EMS Agency. EMS Agency staff have updated these templates for pre-arrival 
instructions based on the latest available evidence and published guidelines.  These 
templates may be used by Dispatch Centers’ administrators in the development of pre-
arrival instructions.  
 
BASIC MEDICAL INSTRUCTIONS PROCEDURE 
 
Initial Screening: Evaluate all calls for severity of complaint and possible cardiac 
arrest 
 
1.   Determine whether the caller is calling for himself/herself or someone else.  If the 
caller is calling for someone else, immediately after confirming location ask the 
following screening questions: 
a.   Is the person alert?  
i.   Check for response to verbal or other stimuli 
b.  Is the person breathing normally? 
 
2.   If the answer to both is ‘No’ proceed to the age-appropriate cardiac arrest 
instructions and instruct the caller in CPR. (see below) 
 
GENERAL MEDICAL for such chief complaints such as: 
Abdominal Pain 
Back Pain 
Chest Pain  
Headache 
Sick Person (including fainting)  
Stroke 
 
1.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
2.   If not alert, rest the patient with the left side down and assess breathing. 
3.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
4.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
5.   If the patient begins to vomit, turn onto their left side.  
6.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
AED INSTRUCTIONS 
 
1.   Place the patient on their back. 
2.   Turn the AED on. 
a.   The AED will verbally instruct you of all the steps.  Follow prompts spoken by 
the machine 
3.   Remove clothing and undergarments to expose the patient’s bare chest.  
4.   If wet, wipe the chest dry.  
5.   If excessively hairy, consider shaving the chest (some AEDs come with razors).  
6.   Place the pads adhesive-side down onto the patient’s chest as illustrated (on the 
non-adhesive sides of the pads). 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 4 OF 15 
•    For adults, place one pad just below the patient’s right collar bone (above the 
nipple) and the other pad below and outside to the left nipple (for women, place 
the left pad just below the inframammary fold). 
•    For children, place one pad in the middle of the chest (between the nipples) and 
the other pad in the middle of the back (between the shoulder blades).  
7.   Assure that the two pads are plugged into the AED.  
8.   Once pads are placed, allow the machine to analyze the patient. Do not touch the 
patient during this time.  
9.   If shock is advised, yell “clear” and assure that no one is touching the patient. Once 
clear, press the shock button. If shock is not advised or the patient does not improve 
after 1
st
 shock, resume 2 minutes of chest compressions before analyzing again.  
ALLERGIC REACTION/ANAPHYLAXIS  
 
1.   If alert, allow the patient to rest a position of comfort. 
2.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
3.   Refer to BREATHING PROBLEMS instructions as needed. 
4.   If the patient has a history of severe allergic reaction to the same allergen and is 
prescribed an epinephrine auto-injector (e.g., Epi-Pen), assist with administration. 
Refer to the epinephrine auto-injector instructions as needed. 
a.   Remove cap but do not press on the top of the cap; this will release the 
needle); place on outer thigh about 6 inches above the knee cap; press down 
firmly (the needle can puncture clothing); count to “three” before removal; do 
not throw away but place to the side. 
b.   If another form of auto-injector is available, refer to those instructions for 
administration. 
5.   If the patient was stung by an insect such as a bee or wasp, remove the stinger by 
scraping the stinger away with a finger nail or with the edge of a credit card.  
6.   Once the stinger is removed, rinse the area with soap and water as able and apply a 
cold pack to affected part. 
7.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
8.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
9.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS 
 
1.   Observe the patient from a safe distance. If safety is in doubt, leave the scene. 
2.   Be calm and reassuring and avoid sudden movements.  
3.   Do not attempt to restrain the patient.  
4.   If hanging, cut the patient down immediately.  
5.   Refer to BLEEDING, BREATHING PROBLEMS or 
INGESTION/OVERDOSE/POISONING instructions as needed. 
6.   Tell the patient to rest in the most comfortable position. 
7.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
8.   Gather the patient’s medications if safe to do so. 
9.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 5 OF 15 
BITES/STINGS 
 
1.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
2.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
3.   Refer to BREATHING PROBLEMS instructions as needed. 
4.   If the patient has a history of severe allergic reaction to the same allergen and is 
prescribed an epinephrine auto-injector (e.g., Epi-Pen), assist with administration. 
Refer to the EPI-PEN or other epinephrine auto-injector as needed; refer to 
ALLERGIC REACTION. 
5.   Provide local wound care: 
• Hymenoptera (ants, bees, wasps): remove the stinger by scraping with 
fingernail or edge of a credit card. Once the stinger is removed, apply a cold 
pack to the affected part.  
• Mammalian bites (cats, dogs, humans): immobilize affected part below 
heart level. If bleeding, apply direct pressure.   
• Marine envenomation and toxins: if the stingray spine is deeply embedded 
into the skin do not remove it. For other marine envenomations, remove the 
barb/stinger and immerse affected part in warm water (stingray); apply 
vinegar and immerse affected part in warm water (jellyfish).  
• Snake and spider bites: immobilize affected part below heart level. Do NOT 
apply ice, a tourniquet. Do NOT attempt to “suck” venom out of affected part.  
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
8.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
BREATHING PROBLEMS 
 
1.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
2.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
3.   If unresponsive and not breathing (or breathing abnormally), refer to CARDIAC 
ARREST instructions.  
4.   Refer to the ALLERGIC REACTION or CHOKING instructions as needed.  
5.   Calmly reassure the patient to take slow, deep breaths.  
6.   If the patient takes medication for a known breathing problems (asthma, COPD), 
assist with administration of inhaler.  
7.   Do NOT encourage the patient to breathe into a paper bag.  
8.   If a pediatric patient is conscious without signs of choking, allow the patient to sit on 
parent’s lap and do not attempt to look into the child’s mouth.  
9.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
10. Gather the patient’s medications. 
11. Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens.  
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 6 OF 15 
BURNS 
 
1.   Confirm scene safety and evacuate the area.  
2.   If the patient is on fire, STOP-DROP-ROLL (with or without a blanket) or douse with 
water.  
3.   Provide local wound care: 
• Chemical burn: 
o   dry chemical-  gently brush off with something other than bare hand 
o   wet chemical-  flush with large amounts of water. 
• Electrical burn: if the patient is still in contact with the electrical source, do 
not touch the patient. If appliance can be unplugged or electrical switch 
turned off safely then do so. 
• Thermal burn: cool with water, but stop cooling if patient begins shivering, 
and remove jewelry in affected area.  
4.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
5.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
6.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
CARDIAC ARREST: ADULT AND CHILD 
 
1.   Verify that the patient is unresponsive and not breathing (or is breathing 
abnormally).  
2.   Place the patient on a flat, hard surface backside down.  
3.   Place the heel of one hand in the middle of patient’s chest (on the breastbone) and 
place your other hand on top of the first hand.  
4.   Interlock your fingers.  
5.   Begin compressions at a rate of at least 100-120 compressions/minute at a depth of 
2 inches and allow for complete recoil; rate can be estimated by singing the song 
“Stayin’ Alive”.  
6.   Continue compression-only CPR until AED or help arrives. 
7.   Once available, set-up the AED. Refer to the AED instructions as needed.  
8.   If shock is not advised or the patient does not improve after 1
st
 shock, resume 2 
minutes of CPR before analyzing again. 
CARDIAC ARREST: PEDIATRIC (infant from birth to 1 year)  
 
1.   Verify that the patient is unresponsive and not breathing (or is breathing abnormally).  
2.   Place the patient on a flat, hard surface backside down.  
•    Infants: Hands encircle the chest with thumbs between the nipples in the 
center of the chest; compress at a depth of 1.5 inches. 
3.   Begin compressions at a rate of at least 100 to 120 compressions/minute and allow 
for complete recoil.  
4.   Optional to give rescue breaths if dispatch operator feels rescuer able to understand 
and follow instructions - 30 chest compressions followed by 2 breaths (30:2).  
•    Begin with head-tilt, or chin-lift. 
•    Cover the patient’s mouth and nose while providing breaths.  
•    Blow until rescuer observes chest rise, allow for exhalation and repeat the 
breath.  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 7 OF 15 
5.   Continue 30:2 for 2 minutes (about 5 cycles) before switching rescuer roles (if 
available).  
6.   If unable or unwilling to provide breaths, continue compression-only CPR until AED 
or help arrives. 
CARDIAC ARREST: NEWBORN 
 
1.   After drying and stimulating the newborn, verify that the baby is unresponsive and 
not breathing (or is breathing abnormally). 
2.   Place the patient on a flat, hard surface backside down.  
3.   Encircled hands around chest and supporting the back, and place 2 thumbs in the 
middle of the patient’s chest (on the breastbone)  
4.   Optional to begin 3 compressions followed by 1 breath (3:1) and allow for complete 
recoil.  
•    Head-tilt, chin-lif t. 
•    Cover both the patient’s nose and mouth with your mouth while providing 
small breaths.  
•    Observe chest rise.  
5.   Continue for 2 minutes before switching rescuer roles (if available) 
6.   If unable or unwilling to provide breaths, continue compression-only CPR until help 
arrives.  
CHILDBIRTH 
 
1.   Is the baby already born?  
•    Yes: Dry and stimulate the baby. Is the baby breathing? 
o   Yes: Proceed to Step 6.  
o   No: Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST: NEWBORN instructions.  
•    No: Proceed to Step 2.  
2.   Have the mother remove all clothing from waist-down.  
3.   Assist the mother onto a clean, safe surface such as a bed or floor, backside down.  
•    If the woman states she is ready to push, or if the head is visible in the 
vaginal opening birth is imminent (about to occur) 
•    If   possible, place a plastic sheet with a bed sheet or newspaper down to 
absorb the liquid and obtain towels to dry the baby once delivered. 
•    Help the woman lie down with her legs apart and back supported by a rolled 
towel or pillow. 
•    Use plastic disposable gloves if available. If gloves not available, wash your 
hands. 
•    Often women grab their knees, squat or lie on the left side.  Allow her to do as 
she prefers. 
4.   Look for a presenting part of the baby: 
•    Nothing: encourage the mother not to push. Continue to monitor for a 
presenting part.  
•    Head (normal): Proceed to Step 5.  
•    Arm, foot (breech): Proceed to Step 7. 
•    Cord (prolapsed cord): Proceed to Step 8.  
5.   Normal delivery (head first) 
•    If the baby’s head is visible in the vaginal opening, the birth is about to occur.  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 8 OF 15 
•    Encourage the mother to exhale and push with each contraction. Several 
contractions may be required to deliver the baby. 
•    Gently place one hand on the top of the baby’s head to prevent the baby from 
delivering too quickly.  
•    Do not try to hurry the birth by pulling on the baby’s head. Let the woman 
push the baby out. 
•    When the head is outside of the vagina, put two fingers along the top side of 
the head and feel around the neck area for a loop of the umbilical cord. It will 
be about the thickness of your little finger. If you can feel it, hook the loop of 
cord with your two fingers and slide it gently over the baby’s head. 
•    Assist the delivery by supporting the baby’s head and shoulder.  The baby 
may turn as it exits the vagina but do not pull or yank on the baby. 
• Be careful during delivery as the baby is slippery; have a dry towel available 
to quickly
 dry the baby removing membranes from the birth sac around the nose and 
mouth.  
• Dry and stimulate the baby. Is the baby breathing? 
o Yes: Proceed to Step 6.  
o No: Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST: NEONATE instructions. 
6.   Post-delivery 
•    Dry  the baby, wrap the baby (excluding the face) in a clean, dry blanket or 
towel, and place the baby on the mother’s chest or abdomen for warmth.  You 
do not need to remove the whitish sticky substance on the baby’s skin.  
Discard wet towels. 
•    Do not cut the umbilical cord keep the baby at the level of the mother’s 
stomach and lower chest and await EMS providers to clamp and cut the cord. 
•    The placenta may deliver if so do not pull on the cord but allow the placenta 
to deliver naturally.  Save the placenta for the EMS personnel when they 
arrive. Place the placenta in a plastic trash bag and set on the bed next to the 
mother or place on a table at the level of the baby being held by mother until 
EMS arrives;  
•    If the mother continues to bleed after the placenta (afterbirth) delivers, firmly 
massage the mother’s lower abdomen.  
•    Continue to re-assess the baby and mother until help arrives.  
7.   Breech delivery:  
•    If the presenting part is not the head, assist the mother into 1 of 2 positions: 
o While still laying backside down, elevate/prop up the mother’s hips up 
high. 
o Roll the mother onto her hands/elbows and knees.  
•    Encourage the mother to breathe deeply and not to push with each 
contraction. 
•    Continue to re-assess the mother until help arrives.  
8.   Cord Prolapse: 
•    Elevate the presenting part of the cord; don’t push the cord back inside the 
mother.  
•    Continue elevating the presenting part until help arrives.  
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 9 OF 15 
CHOKING: ADULT and CHILD (1-8 years old) 
 
1.   Patient is conscious: 
• Partial obstruction (able to breath, cough, cry, speak): calmly reassure 
the patient and encourage continued coughing to expel the object. Continue 
to carefully monitor for decompensation to complete obstruction.  
• Complete obstruction (unable to breath, cough, cry, speak):  
o Perform abdominal thrusts only if the patient is able to stand and is 
conscious 
 From behind, wrap your arms around the patient’s abdomen.  
 Make a fist just above the patient’s belly button.  Wrap one 
hand over the other. 
 Quickly and forcefully, jerk inward and upward on the patient’s 
stomach.  
 Repeat until the object is expelled or the patient becomes 
unconscious (see below).  
o Chest thrusts: 
 If the patient is pregnant or obese, chest thrusts can be done in 
lieu of abdominal thrusts.  
 From behind, wrap your arms around the patient’s chest. 
 Make a fist in the middle of the patient’s chest (breastbone). 
 Quickly and forcefully, jerk into the patient’s chest. 
 Repeat until the object is expelled or the patient becomes 
unconscious (see below). 
2.   Patient is not conscious:  
•    Adult:  
o Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST: ADULT instructions. 
o Caveat: prior to breaths, look in the patient’s mouth for expelled object 
and, if visible in the mouth, carefully remove with your fingers – do not 
attend blind finger sweeps as the foreign body could be pushed 
deeper in the throat.  
•    Child:  
o Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST: PEDIATRIC instructions.  
o Caveat: prior to breaths, look in the patient’s mouth for expelled object 
and, if visible in the mouth, carefully remove with your fingers– do not 
attend blind finger sweeps as the foreign body could be pushed 
deeper in the throat.  
CHOKING: INFANT (<1 years old) 
 
1.   Patient is conscious: 
• Partial obstruction (able to breath, cough, cry, speak): calmly reassure 
the patient and encourage continued coughing to expel the object. Continue 
to carefully monitor for decompensation to complete obstruction.  
•    Complete obstruction (unable to breath, cough, cry, speak): 
o From a seated position, place the infant on your forearm facedown, 
keeping the head lower than the body.  
o With the heel of your hand, deliver 5 back blows between the shoulder 
blades. 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 10 OF 15 
o Turn the infant over and place 2 fingers in the middle of the patient’s 
chest (on the breastbone) and deliver 5 chest compressions at a depth 
of 1.5 inches each. 
o Repeat until the object is expelled, is visible in the mouth and can be 
removed, or the patient becomes unconscious (see below). 
2.   Patient is not conscious: 
•    Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST: PEDIATRIC instructions. 
o Caveat: prior to breaths, look in the patient’s mouth for expelled object 
and, if visible in the mouth, carefully remove with your fingers– do not 
attend blind finger sweeps as the foreign body could be pushed 
deeper in the throat. 
COLD EXPOSURE  
 
1.   If possible, move the patient to a warm, sheltered area out of cold air, wind, or water 
spray.  
2.   If hypothermia is suspected:  
•    Remove wet clothing and wrap the patient in dry clothing and/or blankets. 
•    Do not give the patient alcohol or caffeine (may worsen hypothermia).  
3.   If frostbite is suspected: 
•    Wrap or cover affected part with something dry and warm.  
•    Elevate affected part.  
•    Do not rub or place affected part in hot water. 
4.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
5.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
6.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
CONVULSIONS/SEIZURES 
 
1.   Still seizing: 
•    Do not attempt to restrain or hold the patient down. 
•    Do not place anything in the patient’s mouth.  
•    Move objects away from the patient. 
•    Stay on the phone until the seizure stops and then verify that the patient is 
breathing. 
•    Saliva from the mouth can be wiped away with a dry towel.  
2.   Stopped seizing: 
•    Rest the patient on their left side with right knee forward in recovery position. 
•    Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
•    Gather the patient’s medications. 
•    Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the 
patient’s condition worsens. 
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 11 OF 15 
DIABETIC PROBLEMS 
 
1.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in the most comfortable position. 
•    If low blood sugar is suspected (hypoglycemia), give the patient candy, juice, 
non-diet soda, or any other form of sugar.  
2.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing.   
•    Do not give the person anything to eat or drink. 
3.   If the patient begins to vomit, turn onto their left side.  
4.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
5.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
EMERGING INFECTIONS (e.g. Ebola) 
 
1.   Confirm that the patient has travelled to the affected area of the world and is 
presenting with concerning signs or symptoms, such as fever and bleeding. 
2.   Ask other individuals in the area to remove themselves from the immediate area, but 
not to leave the scene/ property. 
3.   Responding EMS units may contact the Public Health Officer for additional 
instruction 24/7 at 213-974-1234. 
EYE INJURIES 
 
1.   If chemical injury, flush the affected eye with tap water continuously. Take care to 
flush from nose to ear, avoiding the unaffected eye.  
2.   If there is an impaled or penetrating object in the affected eye, do not remove the 
object. If possible, attempt to stabilize object in place. 
3.   If blunt injury, sit the patient upright and calmly reassure them.  
4.   Do not put pressure on the affected eye. 
5.   Do not put drops or ointment into the affected eye.  
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
8.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
HEAT EXPOSURE  
 
1.   If possible, move the patient to a cool, well-vented area out of direct sunlight or away 
from other source(s) of heat.  
2.   If the patient is trapped in an automobile and is conscious, call police. If unconscious, 
attempt to safely break the window. Refer to the UNCONSCIOUS instructions as 
needed.  
3.   Remove outer clothing.  
4.   If very hot, apply room-temperature to cool (not cold nor iced) water to the patient’s skin. 
Use fans if available. 
5.   If available, apply cold packs (indirectly) to the armpits or groin. 
6.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
7.   If not alert, rest the patient on their L-side and assess breathing. 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 12 OF 15 
INGESTION/OVERDOSE/POISONING  
 
1.   Refer to the BREATHING PROBLEMS and CONVULSIONS/SEIZURES instructions 
as needed. 
2.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
3.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
4.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
5.   Gather the patient’s medications, including empty pill bottles. 
6.   If the patient begins to vomit, turn onto their left side.  
7.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
UNCONSCIOUS (including “MAN DOWN”) 
 
1.   If the patient is not breathing, refer to the CARDIAC ARREST instructions. 
2.   If the patient is having difficulty breathing, refer to the BREATHING PROBLEMS 
instructions. 
3.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in the most comfortable position. 
4.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
5.   Look for a medical alert bracelet/necklace. 
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
8.   If the patient begins to vomit, turn onto their left side.  
9.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
TRAUMA INSTRUCTIONS 
 
GENERAL TRAUMA for such chief complaints such as: 
Falls – Injury -  Motor Vehicle Collisions (MVCs) 
 
1.   Do not move an injured patient unless they are in immediate risk of danger/injury.  
2.   If an injured patient must be moved, stabilize the neck and log-roll the body as a unit. 
3.   If an amputation or severe bleeding is present, apply continuous, firm, direct 
pressure and refer to the BLEEDING instructions as needed. 
4.   If a fracture is suspected, do not move the affected part; stabilize in the position 
found.  
5.   If an impaled object is present, do not pull or remove the object. If possible, attempt 
to stabilize object in place. 
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
8.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
9.   If time and scene safety allow, ask potential witnesses to remain on scene until 
responders arrive. 
 
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 13 OF 15 
ASSAULT  
 
1.   Confirm scene safety and advise putting a barrier between the patient and the 
assailant (door, wall). 
2.   Do not move an injured patient unless they are in immediate risk of danger/injury.  
3.   Reassure the patient that help is on the way.  
4.   Encourage the patient not to change, bathe, shower, or go to the bathroom.  
5.   Encourage the patient not to disturb the scene or move weapons.  
6.   Refer to BLEEDING instructions as needed. 
7.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
8.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
9.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
 
BLEEDING  
 
1.   Control bleeding with continuous, firm, direct pressure. If more pressure is needed 
for bigger wounds, use the heel of your hand or knee.  
2.   For extremity wounds where bleeding is not controlled with direct pressure, place a 
commercial tourniquet per manufacturer instructions, if available, secured tightly until 
the bleeding stops completely. For tourniquet with windlass, apply at least three 
turns or more Place amputated part(s) into a clean, dry bag. Do not place in liquid or 
on ice.  
3.   Do not remove impaled objects, attempt to stabilize object in place.  
4.   For a nosebleed, have the patient sit up straight, lean forward slightly, and pinch just 
below the nasal bridge between their index finger and thumb. 
5.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
6.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
7.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
 
DIVING/DROWNING  
 
1.   Patient in water: 
• Deep water: throw a flotation device or rope to the patient. Do not go into 
water unless safe to do so.  
• Shallow water: consider neck or spinal injury.  
o   If neck injury is suspected and the patient is breathing, stabilize the 
neck and support the patient’s body until the patient can safely be 
removed from water.  
o   If neck injury is suspected and the patient not breathing, stabilize the 
neck, remove the patient from water, and begin CPR. Refer to the 
CARDIAC ARREST instructions.  
2.   Patient out of water:  
• Not breathing: begin CPR. Refer to the CARDIAC ARREST instructions.  
• Breathing: rest the patient on their left side.  
•    Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink. 
•    Gather the patient’s medications.  
•    Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the 
patient’s condition worsens. 

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 14 OF 15 
 
ELECTROCUTION  
 
1.   Confirm scene safety and advise caller of continued risks such as electrified water 
(standing water which may conduct electricity).   
2.   Check to see if the patient is free from current: if no or unsure, do not touch the 
patient or source of current.  
3. If safe to do so, turn power off: disconnect from the wall (appliance) or turn off the 
main breaker (home). If near downed utility pole, obtain number of adjacent pole 
only if visible and safe to do so. (Dispatcher: contact utility company with pole 
number).  
4.   Only touch the patient if the power has been confirmed off. 
5.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in the most comfortable position. 
6.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
7.   If unresponsive and not breathing (or breathing abnormally), refer to the CARDIAC 
ARREST instructions. 
8.   Refer to the BURNS and GENERAL TRAUMA instructions as needed. 
9.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink. 
10. Gather the patient’s medications. 
11. Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
 
PENETRATING INJURY (including GUNSHOT and STAB injuries) 
 
1.   Confirm scene safety. If safety is in doubt, leave the scene. 
2.   Avoid disrupting the scene— do not touch or move weapons.  
3.   Do not pull or remove impaled object. If possible, attempt to stabilize object in place. 
4.   Control bleeding. Refer to the BLEEDING instructions as needed. 
5.   If internal organs are exposed, cover with a clean dry cloth.  
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Gather the patient’s medications. 
8.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS 
 
CARBON MONOXIDE INHALATION 
 
1.   Confirm scene safety and evacuate the area to the outside. 
2.   If the patient cannot be evacuated, ventilate the area by opening doors and windows 
(as long as patient is not trapped in a structure fire).  
3.   Refer to the BURNS instructions as needed.  
4.   If alert, allow the patient to rest in a position of comfort. 
5.   If not alert, rest the patient on their left side and assess breathing. 
6.   Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink.  
7.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
 
  

SUBJECT: DISPATCH PREARRIVAL INSTRUCTIONS REFERENCE NO. 227.1 
 
 
 PAGE 15 OF 15 
TRAPPED IN CONFINED SPACE (including INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT) 
 
1.   Confirm scene safety and advise caller of continued risks such as running 
machinery. 
2.   If safe to do so, shut off running machinery.  
3.   Do not remove a trapped patient.  
4.   Refer to the GENERAL TRAUMA instructions as needed. 
5.   Determine a location to meet rescuers and assign someone to meet them. 
6.   Assign someone to gather maintenance/mechanical staff to assist rescuers with 
machinery.  
7.   Monitor the patient’s level of consciousness and breathing; call back if the patient’s 
condition worsens. 
 
TRAPPED IN STRUCTURE FIRE 
 
1.   Re-confirm caller location (address, floor, room number/type, location within room). 
2.   Close the door (do not lock). 
3.   Cover nose and mouth with thin material such as a shirt.  
4.   Cover crack between door and floor with a towel, rug, or anything else that is readily 
available. 
5.   Do not open or break windows. 
6.   Hang an object such as a white sheet from the window to signal help. 
7.   Do not jump from great heights (> 2 stories or 20 feet).  
 
TRAPPED IN SUBMERGED VEHICLE   
 
1.   Unbuckle your seat belt.*  
2.   Unlock but do not open the door.  
3.   Roll down the window— break it if necessary. (Reassure caller that this may feel 
counterintuitive but that this is their best chance of survival).  
4.   Exit through the window.  
5.   If unable to exit through the window, breathe within the vehicle’s air pocket until the 
vehicle has filled with water.  
6.   Once the vehicle has completely filled with water the door will open easier.  
7.   Take a deep breath, exit through the door, and swim toward the surface.*    
 
*If children are present, unbuckle their seatbelt(s) after releasing your own. Help 
propel/push them out of the submerged vehicle prior to your exit.
