# 1034666 822.2a08 01 17

STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
BCIA 8572 
(Rev. 04/2017) 
SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE REPORT 
(Pursuant to Penal Code section 11166) 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
 
 
DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETION OF FORM BCIA 8572 
All Penal Code (PC) references are located in Article 2.5 of the California PC. This article is known as the Child Abuse and Neglect 
Reporting Act (CANRA). The provisions of CANRA may be viewed at: http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes.xhtml 
(specify 
"Penal Code" and search for sections 11164-11174.3). A mandated reporter must complete and submit form BCIA 8572 even if 
some of the requested information is not known. (PC section 11167(a).) 
 
I. MANDATED CHILD ABUSE REPORTERS 
Mandated child abuse reporters include all those individuals 
and entities listed in PC section 11165.7. 
 
II.   TO WHOM REPORTS ARE TO BE MADE ("DESIGNATED 
AGENCIES") 
Reports of suspected child abuse or neglect shall be made 
by mandated reporters to any police department or sheriff's 
department (not including a school district police or security 
department), the county probation department (if designated 
by the county to receive mandated reports), or the county 
welfare department. (PC section 11165.9.) 
 
III. REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES 
Any mandated reporter who has knowledge of or observes a 
child, in his or her professional capacity or within the scope 
of his or her employment, whom he or she knows or 
reasonably suspects has been the victim of child abuse or 
neglect shall report such suspected incident of abuse or 
neglect to a designated agency immediately or as soon as 
practically possible by telephone and shall prepare and send 
a written report thereof within 36 hours of receiving the 
information concerning the incident. (PC section 11166(a).) 
No mandated reporter who reports a suspected incident of 
child abuse or neglect shall be held civilly or criminally liable 
for any report required or authorized by CANRA. Any other 
person reporting a known or suspected incident of child 
abuse or neglect shall not incur civil or criminal liability as a 
result of any report authorized by CANRA unless it can be 
proven the report was false and the person knew it was false 
or made the report with reckless disregard of its truth or 
falsity. (PC section 11172(a).) 
 
IV. INSTRUCTIONS 
SECTION A – REPORTING PARTY: Enter the mandated 
reporter's name, title, category (from PC section 11165.7), 
business/agency name and address, daytime telephone 
number, and today's date. Check yes/no whether the 
mandated reporter witnessed the incident. The signature 
area is for either the mandated reporter or, if the report is 
telephoned in by the mandated reporter, the person taking 
the telephoned report. 
IV. INSTRUCTIONS (continued) 
SECTION B – REPORT NOTIFICATION: Complete the 
name and address of the designated agency notified, the 
date/time of the phone call, and the name, title, and 
telephone number of the official contacted. 
 
SECTION C – VICTIM (One Report per Victim): Enter the 
victim's name, birthdate or approximate age, sex, ethnicity, 
address, telephone number, present location, and, where 
applicable, enter the school, class (indicate the teacher's 
name or room number), and grade. List the primary 
language spoken in the victim's home. Check the 
appropriate yes/no box to indicate whether the victim may 
have a developmental disability or physical disability and 
specify any other apparent disability. Check the appropriate 
yes/no box to indicate whether the victim is in foster care, 
and check the appropriate box to indicate the type of care if 
the victim was in out-of-home care. Check the appropriate 
box to indicate the type of abuse. List the victim's 
relationship to the suspect. Check the appropriate yes/no 
box to indicate whether photos of the injuries were taken. 
Check the appropriate box to indicate whether the incident 
resulted in the victim's death. 
 
SECTION D – INVOLVED PARTIES: Enter the requested 
information for Victim's Siblings, Victim's Parents/Guardians, 
and Suspect. Attach extra sheet(s) if needed (provide the 
requested information for each individual on the attached 
sheet(s)). 
 
SECTION E – INCIDENT INFORMATION: If multiple 
victims, indicate the number and submit a form for each 
victim. Enter date/time and place of the incident. Provide a 
narrative of the incident. Attach extra sheet(s) if needed. 
 
V. DISTRIBUTION 
Reporting Party: After completing form BCIA 8572, retain a 
copy for your records and submit copies to the designated 
agency. 
Designated Agency: Within 36 hours of receipt of form 
BCIA 8572, the initial designated agency will send a copy of 
the completed form to the district attorney and any additional 
designated agencies in compliance with PC sections 
11166(j) and 11166(k).
 
 
1 Alaskan Native 
2 American Indian 
3 Asian Indian 
4 Black 
5 Cambodian 
 
 
6 Caribbean 
7 Central American 
8 Chinese 
9 Ethiopian 
10 Filipino 
 
 
11 Guamanian 
12 Hawaiian 
13 Hispanic 
14 Hmong 
15 Japanese 
ETHNICITY CODES 
16 Korean 
17 Laotian 
18 Mexican 
19 Other Asian 
21 Other Pacific Islander 
 
 
22 Polynesian 
23 Samoan 
24 South American 
25 Vietnamese 
26 White 
 
 
27 White-Armenian 
28 White-Central American 
29 White-European 
30 White-Middle Eastern 
31 White-Romanian 
REFERENCE NO. 822.2a 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-01   REVISED: 04-01-22   SUPERSEDES: 04-01-19
