# 1036072 622.1

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: DATA REQUEST AND LEVELS OF SUPPORT REFERENCE NO. 622.1 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 07-01-16        PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-2025 
SUPERSEDES: 04-15-2022 
 
Data Request Tracking Number: (To be completed by the EMS Agency): _________________ 
 
Complete all requested information below and submit applicable documents. Review 
Release of EMS Data ( Ref. No. 622), prior to completion. 
 
1.   Date:            
2.   Data Recipient (person submitting request) 
a.   Name:            
b.   Title/Position:            
c. Facility/Agency/Organization/Affiliation:            
d.   Mailing Address:            
e.   Telephone number:            
f.    E-mail address:            
3.   Indicate preference on how the data should be provided: 
a. 
 E-Mail 
b. 
 U.S. Mail 
c. 
 Phone 
d. 
 Fax ( ____) _____-________  
e. 
 Other (specify) _________________________________ 
4.   Indicate documents submitted with this request (check all that apply): 
a. 
 Limited Data Set Information (Ref.  No. 622.2) 
b. 
 Intended Use of Limited Data Set Information (Ref.  No. 622.3) 
c. 
 Data Use Agreement (Ref.  No. 622.4) 
d. 
 Confidentiality Agreement (Ref.  No. 622.5) 
 
 

SUBJECT: DATA REQUEST AND LEVELS OF SUPPORT REFERENCE NO. 622.1 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2   OF 2 
5.   Indicate the level(s) of support requested from the EMS Agency (check all that apply): 
a. 
 Support in concept – letter of support or verbal accord of project 
b. 
 Guidance –   provide feedback on methodology, analysis, manuscript, etc. 
c. 
 Data Abstraction –   provide raw data from EMS Agency data registries 
d. 
 Data Analysis –   provide summary data, statistical analysis, tables, figures, etc. 
e. 
 Other (this may include manuscript revision, operations/system resources, grant 
support, etc.) – please describe other support requested 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
6.   Submit completed data request and applicable documents to the following individuals: 
 
Jake Toy, Medical Director for EMS Data Systems and Quality Improvement 
E-  Mail: jtoy2@dhs.lacounty.gov 
10100 Pioneer Boulevard, Suite 200 
Santa Fe Springs, CA 90670 
Phone: (562) 378-1641 
 
 
Aldrin Fontela, EMS Research Programs Manager 
E-  Mail: afontela2@dhs.lacounty.gov 
10100 Pioneer Boulevard, Suite 200 
Santa Fe Springs, CA 90670 
Phone: (562) 378-1662
