# 1040515 1219 PAllergy

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALLERGY Ref. No. 1219-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-10-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for anaphylaxis.  
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic airway maneuvers (MCG 1302) 
Continually assess patient’s airway and ventilation status 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
High-flow Oxygen 15L/min for anaphylaxis with poor perfusion or airway compromise 
 
3. Advanced airway prn (MCG 1302) 
 
4. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
5. For anaphylaxis: 
Epinephrine (1mg/mL) 0.01mg/kg IM, dose per MCG 1309, in the lateral thigh ❶ 
CONTACT BASE: Repeat Epinephrine (1mg/mL) 0.01mg/kg IM every 10 min x2 prn persistent 
symptoms, maximum total 3 doses 
 
6. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
Vascular access for all patients with anaphylaxis 
 
7. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
 
8. For persistent poor perfusion after initial 5mL/kg Normal Saline (anaphylactic shock): 
Continue Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion 
Push-dose Epinephrine – mix 9mL Normal Saline with 1mL Epinephrine (0.1mg/mL) IV 
formulation in a 10mL syringe; administer Push-dose Epinephrine (0.01mg/mL), dose per MCG 
1309 every 1-5 minutes as needed to maintain normal SBP per MCG 1309 until hospital arrival  
CONTACT BASE concurrent with initial dose of Push-dose Epinephrine  
Treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, Shock/Hypotension 
 
9. If wheezing: ❷ 
< 4 year of age: Albuterol 2.5mg (3mL) via neb or 2 puffs via MDI per MCG 1309 ❸ 
≥ 4 year of age: Albuterol 5mg (6mL) via neb or 4 puffs via MDI per MCG 1309 ❸ 
Repeat x2 prn, maximum 3 total doses prior to Base contact 
 
10. For itching/hives: 
Diphenhydramine (50mg/mL) 1mg/kg slow IV push one time, dose per MCG 1309 ❹  
If unable to obtain venous access, Diphenhydramine (50mg/mL) 1mg/kg deep IM, dose per 
MCG 1309 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALLERGY Ref. No. 1219-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-10-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Epinephrine is the drug of choice for allergic reactions with any one of the following: angioedema, 
respiratory compromise or poor perfusion. It should be given IM into a large muscle group, lateral 
thigh preferred or alternatively the lateral gluteus. Vital signs vary by age and normal ranges can be 
found in MCG 1309.  Any pediatric patient with vital signs outside the normal range for age should be 
considered potentially ill and transported to an EDAP or PMC if criteria are met. 
 
❷    Patients with wheezing due to allergic reaction should be treated with Epinephrine IM. Albuterol may 
be administered in addition to Epinephrine IM if wheezing persists. 
 
❸ Consider blow-by to avoid agitation in pediatric patients if a mask cannot be tolerated (e.g., infants 
and toddlers).   
 
❹ Diphenhydramine does not treat anaphylaxis. For patients in anaphylaxis, Epinephrine administration 
is the first priority. Diphenhydramine may be considered once other treatments are complete or in 
stable patients with discomfort for isolated hives.
