# 1040595 1315 CPAP

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES REFERENCE NO. 1315 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 10-1-08                                                                         PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 06-01-18 
SUPERSEDES: 11-01-12 
Medical Control Guideline: CONTINUOUS POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1.   Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) is a non-invasive, mechanical ventilatory 
support system. It is effective in treating patients with shortness of breath by decreasing 
work of breathing, improving pulmonary gas exchange and improving pulmonary 
compliance.  CPAP decreases the need for endotracheal intubation, reduces intensive 
care unit admissions, and shortens   hospital length of stay. 
 
2.   CPAP is approved for patients with moderate-to-severe respiratory distress who meet 
ALL of the following criteria: 
a.   Greater than the length of the length-based resuscitation tape (i.e. Broselow™) 
b.   Awake  
c.   Cooperative 
d.   Able to follow commands 
 
3.   Contraindications to CPAP include:  
a.   Respiratory or cardiac arrest 
b.   Inability to protect airway  
c.   Cannot follow basic commands 
d.   Hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 90mmHg) 
e.   Tracheostomy 
f. Vomiting 
g.   Suspected pneumothorax 
h. Respiratory distress due to traumatic injury 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1.   Explain the procedure to the patient prior to starting CPAP. Patient understanding and 
cooperation are critical to successful treatment.  
 
2.   Titrate CPAP pressure per manufacturer’s guidelines to improvement of symptoms as 
tolerated by patient.  Improvement is demonstrated by a decrease in    respiratory distress, 
improvement in vital signs, and/or an increase in oxygen saturation.  
 
3.   Continuously monitor vital signs, including oxygen saturation and end-tidal carbon 
dioxide (CO
2
), to    ensure adequate ventilation and hemodynamic stability. Document 
findings at least every five minutes throughout the treatment until the transfer of care.   
 
4.   If the patient’s condition worsens or is unable to tolerate CPAP, discontinue CPAP and 
continue to supplement oxygen per MCG 1302. Be prepared to assist ventilations with a 
bag mask as indicated. 
 
5.   Maintain CPAP for patients who tolerate treatment until care is assumed by the receiving 
facility. 
 
6.   Document the patient’s response to therapy, CPAP pressure (initial and at transfer of 
care),   any adverse event while on CPAP, and rationale if CPAP is discontinued prior to 
the transfer of care.
