# 1040494 1243 PTraumaticArrest2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: TRAUMATIC ARREST Ref. No. 1243-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Contact the Trauma Center for patients not meeting criteria for 
determination of death per Ref 814. ❶  
 
1. Prioritize rapid transport for patients who do not meet Ref. 814 ❷ 
 
2. Immediately control major bleeding (MCG 1370) 
Apply tourniquet prn 
 
3. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302; 1309) ❸ 
Ventilate with high flow Oxygen 15L/min 
 
4. Begin chest compressions 
 
5. Perform bilateral needle thoracostomy for suspected tension pneumothorax (MCG 1335) 
 
6. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Assess cardiac rhythm 
 
7. If shockable rhythm (V-Fib/V-Tach) identified:  
Defibrillate V-Fib/V-Tach, dose per MCG 1309 
 
For penetrating trauma: ❹ 
Defibrillate while prioritizing immediate transport 
 
For blunt trauma: ❺ 
Initiate resuscitation on scene  
If organized rhythm is not restored after defibrillation x3 or patient converts to 
nonshockable rhythm  
CONTACT BASE for guidance on continued resuscitation or transport 
 
8. Provide spinal motion restriction (SMR) if indicated (MCG 1360) 
Do not delay transport for SMR ❻ 
 
9. Establish vascular access en route (MCG 1375) 
Establish IO if unable to establish IV access 
 
10. Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV/IO rapid infusion per MCG 1309 x2, maximum 2L 
Administer through two sites simultaneously if possible 
 
11. Hanging/asphyxia should be transported to the nearest Pediatric Medical Center (PMC) if 
transport is <30 mins or Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP) if > 30 minutes, 
not trauma center, unless other evidence of trauma  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: TRAUMATIC ARREST Ref. No. 1243-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶ EMS Personnel are mandated reporters of child abuse and neglect, and a report should be made 
when suspected as per Ref. 822. Communicate suspicion for child abuse and/or neglect to 
accepting ED staff when home suggests children could be at risk for harm (e.g., unkept home, 
evidence of drug or alcohol abuse, unsafe living conditions, known or suspected domestic violence), 
when the history does not match with the severity of physical findings (e.g., child posturing after a 
roll off the couch), when patterned injury or burns or noted (e.g., circular burns as from a cigarette, 
whip marks on the skin, burns of both hands or feet), or when child reports physical or sexual abuse. 
Children < 3 years of age and those with developmental delay are at increased risk of abuse. This 
must also be accompanied by notification to the Department of Children and Family Services 
(DCFS). 
 
❷     Rapid transport after hemorrhage control is the priority for all patients with severe trauma. With the 
exception of hemorrhage control, needle thoracostomy, and initiation of CPR, all other procedures 
may be deferred for immediate ambulance loading of patient and performed en route. 
 
❸    Bag-mask ventilation (BMV) with a viral filter is the preferred initial method of airway management. 
An advanced airway may be placed during transport or if BMV is difficult or ineffective as authorized 
per MCG 1302; supraglottic airway (sizing per MCG 1309) is preferred unless contraindicated. 
Paramedics should use judgment based on patient characteristics, circumstances, and skill level 
when selecting the advanced airway modality for pediatric patients in whom multiple modalities are 
authorized. 
 
❹     Patients with penetrating trauma should receive defibrillation while still prioritizing early transport. 
 
❺ Sudden cardiac death can result from blunt cardiac injury (commotio cordis) triggering V-fib/V-tach.  
Unlike major trauma resulting in hemorrhagic shock, patients with this mechanism typically have 
minimal external trauma and should be treated with immediate defibrillation on scene.  Patients 
with multisystem blunt trauma in persistent cardiac arrest without organized rhythm should generally 
not be transported.  If commotio cordis is the suspected mechanism with minimal external trauma 
and the patient remains in V-fib/V-tach after three defibrillations, contact Base to discuss timing of 
transport versus termination for futility.  
 
❻ For patients in traumatic arrest, spinal motion restriction (SMR) using a backboard causes harmful 
delays in care. However, a backboard may be helpful to assist in patient movement and to support 
chest compressions.
