# 1040400 1220Burns2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BURNS Ref. No. 1220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for burns meeting Trauma Center criteria, 2
nd
 or 3
rd
 degree 
burns ≥ 20% TBSA. 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
If evidence of inhalation injury, treat in conjunction with TP 1236, Inhalation Injury  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
If carbon monoxide exposure suspected, provide high flow Oxygen 15 L/min and treat in 
conjunction with TP 1238, Carbon Monoxide Poisoning ❶ 
 
3. Assess for signs of trauma 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury  
 
4. Remove jewelry and clothing from involved area 
 
5. Apply blanket to keep patient warm 
 
6. For ELECTRICAL burns: 
Cover with dry dressing or sheet, treat in conjunction with TP 1221, Electrocution  
 
7. For THERMAL burns: 
Cover with dry dressing or sheet 
Consider cooling with water for burns isolated to less than 5% BSA 
 
8. For CHEMICAL burns: 
If dry, brush and flush with copious amounts of water 
If liquid, flush with large amounts of water ❷ 
If eye involvement, irrigate eye with Normal Saline 1L during transport; allow patient to remove 
contact lenses if possible, treat in conjunction with TP 1240, HAZMAT 
 
9. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375)  
For IO placement in alert patients administer, Lidocaine 2% 40mg (20mg/mL) slow IO push, 
may repeat once for infusion pain at half initial dose 
 
10. For partial/full thickness burn > 10% body surface area or poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV/IO rapid infusion  
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
CONTACT BASE for persistent poor perfusion to obtain order for additional Normal Saline 1L 
IV/IO 
 
11. Elevate burned extremities as able for comfort 
 
12. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
 
 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BURNS Ref. No. 1220 
  
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Consider potential for carbon monoxide and/or cyanide toxicity in closed space fires. Pulse oximetry   
is not accurate in carbon monoxide poisoning (TP 1238, Carbon Monoxide Poisoning)  
 
❷    Observe for hypothermia; cooling large surface area burns (greater than 10% body surface area) 
may result in hypothermia.
