# 1040604 1365 TCP

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES REFERENCE NO. 1365 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 07-01-09                                                              PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-23 
Medical Control Guideline:  TRANSCUTANEOUS PACING 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Transcutaneous Pacing (TCP) provides temporary external cardiac pacing for the 
treatment of symptomatic bradycardia for patients who are unresponsive to airway 
management or drug therapy. 
 
2. TCP should not be initiated on patients in asystole. 
 
3. Do not delay TCP for IV access if the patient has poor perfusion. 
   
4. Strongly consider sedation for pacing discomfort.  Refer to TP 1212 or 1212-P, Cardiac 
Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia for drugs and dosages. 
 
5. All TCP equipment must be used and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
guidelines. 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1. Explain the procedure to the patient, family member, and/or caregiver. 
 
 
2. For awake patients, provide sedation and analgesia unless contraindicated.  
Contraindications include RR < 10 for adults (for pediatrics < lower limit for color code on 
MCG 1309 ) or unresponsiveness. 
 
3. Place pacing pads in anterior (black)/posterior (red) (A/P) position and connect ECG 
cable. 
 
4. Activate the pacing device, set the initial pacing rate at 70 bpm or 100 bpm for children 
less than 12 months of age.   
 
5. Set the current at 40 milliamperes (mAs).  Slowly increase the mA until electrical and 
mechanical capture is achieved as evidenced by a palpable pulse that correlates with 
the paced heart rate on the monitor.  Once capture is noted increase the mAs by 10mAs 
to ensure ongoing capture. 
 
6. If current is increased to 120-130 mAs without capture; reposition the pacer pads on the 
upper right chest and at the apex of the heart and reattempt pacing and capturing as 
above. 
 
7. If the patient continues to exhibit signs and symptoms of poor perfusion, increase the 
rate by 10 bpm until adequate perfusion is achieved.  Maximum rate is 100 bpm for 
adults and 120 bpm for children.
