# 1040361 1200.4BLSUpgradetoALSAssessment2018 04 30

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BLS UPGRADE TO ALS ASSESSMENT Ref. No. 1200.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Emergency Medical Condition:  A condition or situation in which an individual has an immediate need 
for medical attention. The presence of abnormal vital signs (heart rate and rhythm, respiratory rate, blood 
pressure - except isolated asymptomatic hypertension, oxygen saturation) are also indications of an 
emergency medical condition. Patients who meet any criteria for Base Contact or Receiving Hospital 
Notification are also considered to have an emergency medical condition. 
 
Extremis: A life-threatening, time-critical situation (e.g., unmanageable airway, uncontrollable 
hemorrhage) that, without immediate stabilization, could result in serious and immediate jeopardy to the 
health of an individual (in the case of a pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child), 
such that the patient's life would be jeopardized by transportation to any destination but the most 
accessible receiving center (MAR) or for pediatrics the emergency department approved for pediatrics 
(EDAP).  
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. ALS providers, as compared to BLS providers, have additional assessment skills and equipment 
that allow a more thorough evaluation of patients in the field to determine whether an emergency 
medical condition is present.   
 
2. Patients with an emergency medical condition require transport to the emergency department and 
may benefit from ALS care prehospital. 
 
3. Patients released on scene are at increased risk of having a bad outcome. 
 
4. BLS providers should always use their judgment when considering need for an ALS assessment.  
While this document lists when ALS assessment is required prior to transport or release at the 
scene, BLS providers need not be limited by this list and should request an ALS response 
whenever they feel it necessary. 
 
5. For patients in extremis or for those patients for which waiting for ALS may be longer than 
transport to the ED, BLS providers may transport to the closest facility if, in their judgment, this 
will provide the most rapid ALS care for the patient.  
 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1. If the patient has an emergency medical condition as defined above and a BLS unit is alone on 
scene, the BLS unit should immediately consider whether an ALS assessment is required.  If en 
route, the ALS unit should not be cancelled. 
 
2. Any adult or pediatric patient with a provider impression requiring Base Contact as defined in Ref. 
1200.2 requires ALS assessment and transport unless otherwise directed by online medical 
control. 
 
3. Additionally, an ALS assessment is required for pediatric patients who meet transport guidelines 
to a Pediatric Medical Center and pediatric patients in labor.  An ALS assessment with Base 
Contact is required for patients 13-36 months of age who are not transported (unless no medical 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BLS UPGRADE TO ALS ASSESSMENT Ref. No. 1200.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 2 
complaint or with isolated minor extremity injury).  Patients ≤12 months require transport. 
 
4. Finally, patients with the following high-risk features also require an ALS assessment regardless 
of provider impression. The ALS assessment will determine the provider impression and the level 
of transport required. 
 
a. The following abnormal vital signs sustained or deteriorating over two measurements 5 
minutes apart:  
 
i. For adults: 
a. HR ≥ 120  
b. SBP < 90  
c. RR ≥ 24  
d. O
2
 Sat <94% (<88% for COPD patients) – If patient on home O
2
, as 
measured on usual O
2
 flow rate (If pulse oximetry is available) 
 
ii. For pediatrics, as per MCG 1309 
 
b. Chief complaints including: 
 
i. Acute focal neurologic symptoms 
ii. Altered mental status 
iii. Chest pain (medical cause) 
iv. Severe agitation requiring medication 
v. Shortness of breath 
vi. Syncope/Near syncope 
vii. Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy greater than or equal to 20 weeks
