# 1040381 1204FeverSepsis2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: FEVER / SEPSIS Ref. No. 1204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG if cardiac ischemia suspected 
 
4. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
5. If available, consider applying capnography for patients in whom you suspect sepsis (MCG 1305) 
❶ 
 
6. For suspected sepsis with any one of the following: tactile fever, tachycardia, or poor perfusion : 
Normal Saline 1L IV/IO rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
Document Provider Impression of Sepsis ❷ 
 
For persistent poor perfusion (MCG 1355), treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
7. Check blood glucose prn;  
If < 60mg/dL or >400 mg/dL treat in conjunction with TP 1203, Diabetic Emergencies 
 
8. If fever present without signs of sepsis or poor perfusion: 
Perform passive cooling measures and cover with thermal blankets if shivering occurs 
Document Provider Impression of Fever ❸ 
 
9. Obtain a travel history 
For potential emerging infectious disease, contact the Medical Alert Center to determine if special 
isolation procedures or transport is required ❹ 
 
10. For nausea or vomiting:  
Ondansetron 4mg ODT/IV/IM  
 
11. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
  
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: FEVER / SEPSIS Ref. No. 1204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶   An end-tidal CO
2
 (EtCO
2
) reading ≤ 25mmHG strongly supports the provider impression of sepsis in 
patients for whom sepsis is suspected. 
 
❷    Sepsis is defined as the body’s response to infection and may include fever, tachycardia or 
bradycardia, tachypnea, and signs of poor perfusion. Other signs of infection may be present such as 
cough (e.g., pneumonia), painful urination (e.g., urinary tract infection), abdominal pain  
(e.g., appendicitis), headache (e.g., meningitis), or a red swollen extremity (e.g., cellulitis, or 
necrotizing fasciitis). Septic shock is a continuum of signs and symptoms, which includes the 
presence of hypotension and/or evidence of poor perfusion. If infection is present and sepsis with or 
without shock is present document provider impression as Sepsis. 
 
❸    Fever is a natural response of the body to fight infection and may be present without signs of sepsis.  
If fever is present without signs of sepsis (tachypnea, tachycardia, or obvious sign of infection) or 
septic shock (signs of poor perfusion), document the provider impression as Fever. 
 
 ❹   Certain emerging diseases (e.g., Ebola virus disease) require special isolation procedures and 
transport. Determination of suspected cases must be made in coordination with the Department of 
Public Health (DPH). The Medical Alert Center (MAC) will facilitate DPH consultation and deployment 
of a High-Risk Ambulance (HRA) when indicated. Contact the MAC via phone at (562) 347-1789, 
ReddiNet, or VMED-28. 
 
For Ebola Virus Disease: Patient Assessment and Transportation Guidelines can be accessed at the 
EMS Agency website or the following link: 
 
https://file.lacounty.gov/SDSInter/dhs/1040046_LACoEbola911FlowChart-CongoDRC20180524FINAL.pdf
