# 1040472 1221 PElectrocution2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ELECTROCUTION Ref. No. 1221-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
1. Ensure source of electricity is turned off ❶ 
 
2. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. For cardiac arrest, treat per TP 1210-P Cardiac Arrest ❷ 
 
4. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
5. Advanced airway prn (MCG 1302) 
 
6. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-Lead ECG prn  
If cardiac dysrhythmia present, treat in conjunction with TP 1212-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia-
Bradycardia or TP 1213-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia-Tachycardia ❸ 
 
7. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury  
 
8. Remove jewelry and clothing from involved areas 
 
9. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
10. For burns, treat in conjunction with TP 1220-P, Burns 
Cover affected areas with dry dressing or sheet ❹ 
 
11. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, Shock/Hypotension 
 
12. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
Dose per MCG 1309 
 
13. For nausea or vomiting in patients ≥ 4 years old: 
Ondansetron 4mg ODT  
 
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ELECTROCUTION Ref. No. 1221-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶    Do not touch the patient unless you have removed the source of the electricity. An electrical current 
can be conducted through water and skin. Ensure that area surrounding the patient is dry before 
approaching him/her.  
 
❷   Consider prolonged cardio-pulmonary resuscitation.  
 
❸    Electrocution may result in ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, asystole or other 
dysrhythmias. However, if the patient is in a regular rhythm on evaluation, they are unlikely to 
develop a dysrhythmia. 
 
❹   Superficial skin findings do not correlate with the severity of an electrical burn. As the electrical 
current passes through tissue, it can cause more damage than is superficially present.
