# 1040410 1231Seizure2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SEIZURE  Ref. No. 1231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for status epilepticus or pregnant patients.   
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury  
 
4. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
5. For suspected eclampsia, 
CONTACT BASE, do not delay transport ❶     
 
6. If seizure stops spontaneously prior to EMS arrival or no witnessed seizure by EMS:  
Document Provider Impression – Seizure - Post 
 
7. For active seizure witnessed by EMS:  
Midazolam 10mg (2mL) IM/IN, or 
 
Midazolam 5 mg (1mL) IV/IO, if existing vascular access, repeat x1 in 2 min prn 
 
Maximum total dose prior to Base contact 10mg all routes  
Document Provider Impression – Seizure – Active, even if seizure spontaneously resolves ❷❸ 
 
CONTACT BASE for persistent seizure and additional medication orders  
May repeat as above up to a maximum total dose of 20mg  
 
8. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
9. For persistent seizure or persistent ALOC: 
Check blood glucose 
If < 60mg/dL or > 400mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203, Diabetic Emergencies  
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SEIZURE  Ref. No. 1231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶   Preeclampsia and eclampsia may develop anytime between 20 weeks gestation and 6 weeks after 
delivery (postpartum).  Signs/symptoms of preeclampsia include systolic blood pressure > 140, 
edema, changes in vision, headache and/or right upper quadrant pain. Treat seizures from eclampsia 
with Midazolam. 
 
❷   Active seizures may include tonic and/or clonic activity or focal seizure with altered level of 
consciousness. Eye deviation, clenched jaw, lip smacking or focal twitching may be subtle signs of 
seizure.  
 
❸ Seizures may occur as a result of underlying medical problems or toxic ingestions. Make every effort 
to obtain a medical history and determine all medications/drugs that the patient may have taken.
