# 1040395 1214PulmonaryEdema2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PULMONARY EDEMA / CHF Ref. No. 1214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-01-20 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for severe respiratory distress unresponsive or not amenable to 
CPAP. 
 
1.   Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2.   Maintain patient in position of comfort 
❶ 
 
3.   Administer   Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
High flow Oxygen 15 L/min for patients with impending respiratory failure 
 
4.   CPAP for all alert patients with moderate or severe respiratory distress, SBP ≥ 90mmHg, and no 
other contraindications (MCG 1315)
 ❷ 
 
5.   Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
 
6.   For associated chest pain and/or suspected cardiac ischemia 
❸ 
Perform 12-lead ECG 
Aspirin 325mg chewable tablets PO if alert  
Treat in conjunction with TP 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
 
7.   Establish vascular access (MCG 1375) 
 
8.   For SBP > 100 with no sexually enhancing drugs within 48 hours:
 ❹ 
Nitroglycerin, 0.4mg  SL, for SBP ≥ 100mmHg 
0.8mg SL, for SBP ≥ 150mmHg 
1.2mg SL, for SBP ≥ 200mmHg 
Repeat every 3-5min prn x2 for persistent dyspnea  
Assess blood pressure prior to each administration and determine subsequent dose based on 
SBP as listed above 
Hold Nitroglycerin if SBP < 100mmHg 
❺ 
 
9.    If wheezing despite CPAP 
Albuterol 5mg (6mL) via neb 
May be given simultaneously with nitroglycerin based on clinical assessment of patient 
If patient reports history of COPD or asthma, treat in conjunction with TP 1237, Respiratory 
Distress 
 
10.  For patients who progress to respiratory failure and/or shock 
Assist ventilations and CONTACT BASE 
Treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension  
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PULMONARY EDEMA / CHF Ref. No. 1214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-01-20 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶ Fowler’s or Semi-Fowler’s positioning is likely to be most comfortable for awake patients with 
pulmonary edema. 
 
 
❷
 Early use of CPAP has been shown to decrease hospital length of stay and risk of intubation for 
patients with pulmonary edema. Unless contraindicated, it should be initiated for all patients in 
moderate or severe respiratory distress from pulmonary edema regardless of SpO
2
. 
 
Contraindications: refer to MCG 1315 
 
❸   Cardiac ischemia should be suspected in patients complaining of chest pain or with new onset 
pulmonary edema without history of CHF/Heart failure. CHF is a common cause of ECG 
abnormalities that do not require transport to a SRC.  
 
❹  In patients with recent use of sexually enhancing drugs, or systolic murmur and pulmonary edema 
due to critical aortic stenosis, nitroglycerin may precipitate significant hypotension and cardiovascular 
collapse. If patient with systolic murmur on exam, consider discussion with Base Physician prior to 
NTG administration. 
 
 
❺   Sudden significant decreases in blood pressure may cause stroke symptoms in patients with 
previously uncontrolled hypertension. If blood pressure decreases > 40mmHg or patient develops 
neurologic abnormalities (stroke symptoms or ALOC) after nitroglycerin, hold additional doses. 
Reassess blood pressure after 5 minutes.
