# 1040471 1220 PBurns2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BURNS Ref. No. 1220-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for burns meeting Trauma Center criteria, 2
nd
 or 3
rd
 degree 
burns ≥ 10% TBSA. 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
If evidence of inhalation injury, treat in conjunction with TP 1236-P, Inhalation Injury  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
If carbon monoxide exposure suspected, provide high-flow Oxygen
 
15 L/min and treat in 
conjunction with TP 1238-P, Carbon Monoxide Poisoning ❶ 
 
3. Assess for signs of trauma 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury  
 
4. Remove jewelry and clothing from involved area  
 
5. Apply blanket to keep patient warm ❷ 
 
6. For ELECTRICAL burns  
 Cover with dry dressing or sheet, treat in conjunction with TP 1221-P, Electrocution 
 
7. For THERMAL burns ❸ 
 Cover with dry dressing or sheet 
 Consider cooling with water for burns isolated to less than 5% BSA 
 
8. For CHEMICAL burns 
If dry, brush and flush with copious amounts of water 
If liquid, flush with large amounts of water ❹ 
 If eye involvement, irrigate eye with Normal Saline 1L during transport; allow patient to remove 
contact lenses if possible, treat in conjunction with TP 1240-P, HAZMAT 
 
9. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375)  
 
For IO placement in alert patients administer Lidocaine 2% 0.5mg/kg (20mg/mL) slow IO push, 
dose per MCG 1309, may repeat once for infusion pain at half initial dose 
 
10. For partial/full thickness burn >10% body surface area or poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV/IO rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
CONTACT BASE for persistent poor perfusion to obtain order for additional Normal Saline 
20mL/kg IV/IO 
 
11. Elevate burned extremities as able for comfort 
 
12. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
Dose per MCG 1309 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: BURNS Ref. No. 1220-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Consider potential for carbon monoxide and/or cyanide toxicity in closed space fires. Pulse oximetry   
is not accurate in carbon monoxide poisoning. (TP 1238-P, Carbon Monoxide Poisoning)  
 
❷    Infants and small children are at high risk for hypothermia due to their large surface area to body   
      mass ratio, reduced ability to shiver, and limited body fat.  
 
❸   EMS Personnel are mandated reporters of child abuse and neglect, and a report should be made 
when suspected as per Ref. 822. Communicate suspicion for child abuse and/or neglect to accepting 
ED staff when home suggests children could be at risk for harm (e.g., unkept home, evidence of drug 
or alcohol abuse, unsafe living conditions, known or suspected domestic violence), when the history 
does not match with the severity of physical findings (e.g., child posturing after a roll off the couch), 
when patterned injury or burns or noted (e.g., circular burns as from a cigarette, whip marks on the 
skin, burns of both hands or feet), or when child reports physical or sexual abuse. Children < 3 years 
of age and those with developmental delay are at increased risk of abuse.  This must also be 
accompanied by notification to the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS). 
 
❹    Observe for hypothermia; cooling large surface area burns (>10% body surface area) may result in 
hypothermia.
