# 1040596 1320 LOC

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES REFERENCE NO. 1320 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 03-15-03                                                              PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 06-01-18 
SUPERSEDES: 11-01-12 
Medical Control Guideline:  LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
1. Evaluation and documentation of the patient’s level of consciousness are 
key components of a thorough patient assessment. 
 
2. The patient’s baseline level of consciousness should be taken into consideration 
when evaluating whether the altered level of consciousness (ALOC) finding 
represents an acute change or is normal for the patient. 
 
3. Signs and symptoms of ALOC may present as disorientation to person, place or time; 
confusion; lethargy; impaired cognition; coma; inappropriate aggressiveness; or 
hostility. These findings should alert EMS personnel to the possibility that the patient 
may have a serious underlying medical condition. 
 
4. If the patient has ALOC, evaluation of past medical history, including history of ALOC 
reported by patient or family members, may provide clues to the cause of the patient’s 
ALOC.
 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1. Assess orientation by asking the patient the following: 
a. Name 
b. Where they live/where they are 
c. Day of week/year/time of day 
Patients unable to reasonably answer one or more of the above shall be considered 
to have ALOC. 
 
2. Utilize the appropriate Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) to assess the neurological status 
of all patients. Report and document the GCS in the following order: eye opening, 
verbal response, and motor response. 
 
 
Adult Child (1-4 yrs.) Infant 
EYE OPENING 
   4 
Spontaneous Spontaneous Spontaneous 
   3 
To voice To voice To shout 
   2 
To pain To pain To pain 
   1 
None None None 
VERBAL RESPONSE 
   5 
Oriented Oriented Smiles and coos appropriately 
   4 
Confused Confused Cries and consolable 
   3 Inappropriate Inappropriate Persistent inappropriate crying and/or 
screaming 
   2 
Incomprehensible Incomprehensible Grunts or is agitated or is restless 
   1 
None None None 
MOTOR RESPONSE 
   6 
Obedient Obeys command Spontaneous 
   5 
Purposeful Localizes to pain Localizes to pain 
   4 
Withdraws to pain Withdraws to pain Withdraws to pain 
   3 
Flexion 
(decorticate) 
Flexion  
(decorticate) 
Flexion 
(decorticate) 
   2 
Extension 
(decerebrate) 
Extension 
(decerebrate) 
Extension  
(decerebrate) 
   1 
None None None 

SUBJECT:  LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS REFERENCE NO. 1320 
 
REVISED: 06-01-18 PAGE 2 OF 2
  
 
NOTE: For patients unable to communicate or patients with a language 
barrier, estimate appropriateness of motor response, obedience, and verbal 
response by consulting with the family and/or primary caregiver(s), if 
applicable. 
 
3. If the patient has ALOC consider possible causes using AEIOU-TIPS: 
 
A   –  Alcohol, abuse of substances 
E –  Electrolytes 
 I –  Infection 
O –   Oxygen (hypoxia), overdose 
U   –  Uremia 
T –  Trauma, tumor, child maltreatment, toxic substance (or adverse reactions 
to medications 
 I –  Insulin (hypoglycemia) 
P –  Poisoning, Psych 
S –  Seizures, Sepsis, Stroke, Subarachnoid Hemorrhage 
 
4. Perform an on scene assessment, obtain history from caregivers including baseline 
functional status, and complete physical assessment including neurological exam to 
evaluate patient for signs of stroke. 
 
5.   Point of care testing should include pulse oximetry, glucose testing, and cardiac 
monitoring to include 12-lead ECG in patients with suspected cardiac ischemia or 
dysrhythmia.
