# 1040484 1233 PSyncope NearSyncope2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SYNCOPE / NEAR SYNCOPE Ref. No. 1233-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
4. For symptomatic orthostasis (in older children), signs of dehydration or fluid losses, or for poor 
perfusion: ❶ ❷ 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, Shock/Hypotension  
 
5. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308)  
Perform 12-Lead ECG if dysrhythmia suspected  
If cardiac dysrhythmia is present, treat per TP 1212-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia-Bradycardia or        
TP 1213-P, Cardiac-Dysrhythmia-Tachycardia 
 
6. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury  
 
7. For persistent ALOC, treat in conjunction with TP 1229-P, ALOC ❸ 
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SYNCOPE / NEAR SYNCOPE Ref. No. 1233-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 10-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶   Patients who are lightheaded and/or tachycardic when sitting and/or standing compared to lying 
down, referred to as orthostatic, are likely dehydrated and in need for fluid resuscitation.  Orthostatic 
vitals provide little information and may result in harm so should not be performed. Syncope can 
result from a lack of adequate perfusion to the brain, and in the setting of suspected dehydration or 
fluid losses, this can be a sign of poor perfusion.  Therefore, for patients who present with syncope 
with orthostasis and/or dehydration, fluid resuscitation is appropriate unless contraindicated.   
 
❷    In females of child-bearing age with syncope, ask about possible pregnancy and any history of 
vaginal bleeding. One cause of syncope in females is a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. This can be life 
threatening and may present with poor perfusion and require fluid resuscitation with Normal Saline.  
Contact Base if patient known to be pregnant. 
 
❸    Syncope in children is most often a result of vasovagal syncope and transport to an EDAP is 
appropriate. However, syncope associated with a dysrhythmia or ALOC indicates a serious 
underlying disease and patients should be transported to a PMC.
