# 1040455 1202 PGeneralMedical2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL MEDICAL Ref. No. 1202-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-20 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1.   Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2.   Control external hemorrhage/bleeding prn (MCG 1370) 
 
3.   Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
4.   Assess for signs of trauma 
For traumatic injury, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury 
 
5.   Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
For suspected cardiac ischemia or dysrhythmia, perform 12-lead ECG and CONTACT BASE ❶ 
For patients with dysrhythmias, treat per TP 1212-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia or        
TP 1213-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia  
If patient with palpitations but normal sinus rhythm on 12-lead ECG – document Provider 
Impression as Palpitations 
 
6.   Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
7.   Assess and document pain (MCG 1345) 
Consider the following Provider Impressions: 
If chest pain present without suspicion of cardiac cause – document Chest Pain – Not Cardiac  
If pain in neck or back without trauma – document Body Pain – Non-traumatic 
If headache and no report or signs of trauma and normal physical assessment – document          
Headache – Non-traumatic 
 
8.   For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
Dose per MCG 1309 
 
9.   For nausea or vomiting in patients ≥ 4 years old: 
Ondansetron 4mg ODT and treat in conjunction with TP 1205-P, GI/GU Emergencies 
 
10.  For patients with complaints of weakness  
Assess neurologic exam; if focal findings present or stroke suspected, treat in conjunction with   
TP 1232-P, Stroke/ CVA/ TIA.   CONTACT BASE and transport to a PMC
 ❷ 
If no focal weakness present and complaint of generalized weakness – document                
Weakness  –   General 
 
11.  Consider the following Provider Impressions: 
If cold/cough symptoms without respiratory distress or wheezing – document Cold/Flu Symptoms 
If isolated pain or swelling in extremity – document Extremity Pain/Swelling – Non-traumatic 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL MEDICAL Ref. No. 1202-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-20 PAGE 2 OF 2 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶     Chest pain in pediatrics is rarely due to cardiac ischemia. Children at risk are   
  those with history of Kawasaki’s Disease or with congenital heart conditions. Young athletes    
  often show slow heart rates and ST-elevation which is normal and not a result of ischemia.   
  If there is a concern for cardiac ischemia contact the Base and consider  
  transport to a PMC or to a PMC that is also an SRC - document Chest Pain-Suspected Cardiac 
 
❷
   Children with focal neurologic signs may have a stroke mimic or a stroke.  These are 
  specialized problem often requiring subspecialists   at PMCs. Contact the Base hospital for 
  transport of these patients to a PMC.
