# 1040485 1234 PAirwayObstruction2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION Ref. No. 1234-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-22 PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for patients with severe respiratory distress and/or respiratory 
arrest.  
 
1.   Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)
 ❶ ❷ 
 
2.   Administer   Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
High flow Oxygen
 
15L/min for all patients with impending respiratory arrest/failure ❸ 
 
3.   For airway obstruction due to foreign body: 
If patient unable to speak but is conscious, perform 5 abdominal thrusts or, if <1 year, alternate 5 
back blows and 5 chest thrusts 
If patient becomes unconscious lower to ground and begin chest compressions 
 
If patient is unconscious, initiate CPR x 2 min 
Perform direct laryngoscopy to visualize potential obstruction when indicated 
Remove visible foreign body with Magill forceps 
 
4.   If patient has an Unmanageable Airway (MCG 1302): 
Initiate immediate transport to EDAP and CONTACT BASE en route 
 
5.   Advanced airway prn for patients of appropriate age and size (MCG 1302) 
 
6.   Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
 
7.   If patient is conscious and spontaneous ventilation is adequate: 
Monitor in position of comfort
  
 
8.   Consider specific presentation: 
For suspected anaphylaxis treat per TP 1219-P, Allergy 
 
For stridor concerning for croup or tracheitis:  
<1 year old: Epinephrine (1mg/mL) 2.5mL via neb, dose per MCG 1309 
❸ 
≥ 1 year of age: Epinephrine (1mg/mL) 5mL via neb, dose per MCG 1309 
❸ 
Repeat x1 in 10 min prn, maximum 2 total doses prior to Base contact 
Prepare to manage airway if patient’s condition deteriorates 
 
For visible airway/tongue swelling: 
Epinephrine (1mg/mL) 0.01mg/kg IM dose per MCG 1309 
Repeat every 10 min prn x2, maximum 3 total doses prior to Base contact 
 
For patients with a tracheostomy and suspected obstruction:
 ❹ 
Attempt suctioning 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION Ref. No. 1234-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-22 PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
Remove and clean inner cannula with saline; replace if positive-pressure ventilation required 
❺ 
If obstruction is not relieved by above maneuvers: 
 
For children ≥ 7 years of age consider placing a 6.0mm endotracheal tube in the stoma and 
attempt BMV 
❻ 
 
For children < 7 years of age remove entire tracheostomy tube and cover stoma and attempt 
BMV first via the mouth. If no chest rise attempt BMV over stoma with a small mask. 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION Ref. No. 1234-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-22 PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶   In evaluation of patient with suspected airway obstruction, assessment of the airway should include 
the tongue and posterior oropharynx, including uvula and tonsillar pillars. 
 
❷  Supraglottic airway placement is contraindicated for patients with upper airway obstruction.   
 
❸ Consider blow-by to avoid agitation in pediatric patients if a mask cannot be tolerated (e.g., infants 
and toddlers). 
 
❹   Common tracheostomy emergencies include obstruction of the tracheostomy tube and bleeding.  
There are different types of tracheostomy tubes, some with an inner cannula and/or obturator. The 
obturator obstructs airflow and is usually only used during insertion. The inner cannula allows for 
connection to a ventilator or bag mask for positive pressure ventilation. Tracheostomy tubes may be 
cuffed (balloon inflated in the trachea as indicated by a side port) or uncuffed. If the tracheostomy 
does not have a cuff, the airway is not protected against aspiration and air can leak out through the 
mouth during positive-pressure ventilation. If respiratory failure occurs in a patient with an uncuffed 
tracheostomy tube, it should be replaced with a cuffed endotracheal tube (if the appropriate size is 
available) if feasible in order to facilitate positive-pressure ventilation. For bleeding, direct pressure 
should be applied and suctioning as needed to reduce aspiration of blood. 
 
❺ The inner cannula is required to attach a ventilator or bag mask to a tracheostomy for positive-
pressure ventilation. It may become obstructed with secretions; remove, clean with saline, and 
replace once obstruction is relieved. If it cannot be replaced, cover the stoma with gauze and begin 
BMV via the mouth. If no chest rise, place a small mask over the stoma and begin stoma-mask 
ventilation. 
 
❻ Removal and reinsertion of the tracheostomy tube is contraindicated if the tracheostomy is < 1 week 
old because the stoma has not fully formed and a false tract may be created. Once the stoma has 
matured, a tracheostomy can be safely removed and replaced when necessary. If a flexible 
intubation guide (e.g., Bougie) can be inserted, it may be used to guide the removal and reinsertion 
of the tracheostomy or endotracheal tube.
