# 1040457 1204 PFeverSepsis2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: FEVER / SEPSIS Ref. No. 1204-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
4. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
5. For suspected sepsis: ❶ 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV/IO rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
CONTACT BASE to obtain order for additional Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV/IO per MCG 1309 
Document Provider Impression of Sepsis  
 
For persistent poor perfusion (MCG 1355), treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, 
Shock/Hypotension 
 
6. Check blood glucose prn;  
< 60mg/dL or >250mg/dL treat in conjunction with TP 1203-P, Diabetic Emergencies 
 
7. If fever present without signs of sepsis or poor perfusion: 
Perform passive cooling measures and cover with blankets if shivering occurs. 
Document Provider Impression of Fever ❷❸❹ 
 
8. For nausea or vomiting in patients ≥ 4 years old:  
Ondansetron 4mg ODT  
 
9. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
Dose per MCG 1309  
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: FEVER / SEPSIS Ref. No. 1204-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶   Sepsis is defined as the body’s response to infection and may include fever, tachycardia or 
bradycardia, tachypnea, and signs of poor perfusion. Other signs of infection may be present such as 
cough (e.g., pneumonia), painful urination (e.g., urinary tract infection), abdominal pain                 
(e.g., appendicitis), headache (e.g., meningitis), or a red swollen extremity (e.g., cellulitis, or 
necrotizing fasciitis). Septic shock is a continuum of signs and symptoms, which includes the 
presence of hypotension or evidence of poor perfusion. If infection is present and sepsis with or 
without shock is present document provider impression as Sepsis. 
 
❷    Fever is a natural response of the body to fight infection and may be present without signs of sepsis. 
Often children with a fever have tachycardia, however if tachycardia is greater than that explained by 
the fever (>180 in infants and >140 in children) consider sepsis. If fever is present without signs of 
sepsis (skin hot to touch and tachycardia) or septic shock (signs of poor perfusion), document the 
provider impression as Fever. 
 
❸    For patients presenting with fever, obtain travel history, and if travel history positive contact the 
Medical Alert Center to determine risk for infectious disease requiring special isolation procedures or 
transport. 
 
❹ Infants and small children are at high risk for hypothermia due to their large surface area to body 
mass ratio, reduced ability to shiver, and limited body fat. Infants with sepsis may present with fever 
or hypothermia. 
 
For Ebola Virus Disease: Patient Assessment and Transportation Guidelines can be accessed at the 
EMS Agency website or the following link  
 
https://file.lacounty.gov/SDSInter/dhs/1040046_LACoEbola911FlowChart-CongoDRC20180524FINAL.pdf
