# 1040413 1234Airwayobstruction2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION Ref. No. 1234 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-22 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for patients with severe respiratory distress and/or respiratory 
arrest.  
 
1.   Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)
 ❶ ❷ 
 
2.   Administer   Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
High flow Oxygen 15 L/min for all patients with impending respiratory arrest due to severe 
airway obstruction 
 
3.   For physical obstruction from foreign body: 
If patient unable to speak but is conscious, perform 5 abdominal thrusts; reassess, if patient 
becomes unconscious lower to ground and begin chest compressions 
 
If patient is unconscious, initiate CPR X 2 minutes 
Perform direct laryngoscopy to visualize potential obstruction when indicated 
Remove visible foreign body with Magill forceps 
 
4.   If patient has an Unmanageable Airway (MCG 1302): 
Initiate immediate transport to MAR and CONTACT BASE en route 
 
5.   Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
 
6.   If patient is conscious and spontaneous ventilation is adequate: 
Monitor in position of comfort
  
 
7.   Consider specific presentation: 
For suspected anaphylaxis treat per TP 1219, Allergy 
 
For stridor:  
Epinephrine (1mg/mL solution) administer 5mg (5mL) via neb 
Repeat x1 in 10 min prn 
Prepare to manage airway if patient’s condition deteriorates 
 
For visible airway/tongue swelling: 
Epinephrine (1mg/mL) administer 0.5mg (0.5mL) IM  
Repeat every 10 min prn x2, maximum total 3 doses 
 
For patients with a tracheostomy and suspected obstruction:
 ❸ 
Attempt suctioning 
Remove and clean inner cannula with saline if present; replace if positive-pressure ventilation 
required 
❹ 
If the obstruction is not relieved, remove entire tracheostomy tube and replace with a new 
tracheostomy or 6.0mm endotracheal tube 
❺ 
If a new tube cannot be placed, cover stoma and attempt BMV first via the mouth. If no chest rise 
attempt BMV over stoma with a small mask 
 
8.   Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION Ref. No. 1234 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-22 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶ In evaluation of patient with suspected airway obstruction, assessment of the airway should include 
the tongue and posterior oropharynx, including uvula and tonsillar pillars. 
 
❷  Supraglottic airway placement is contraindicated for patients with upper airway obstruction.   
 
❸   Common tracheostomy emergencies include obstruction of the tracheostomy tube and bleeding.  
There are different types of tracheostomy tubes, some with an inner cannula and/or obturator. The 
obturator obstructs airflow and is only used during insertion. The inner cannula allows for connection 
to a ventilator or bag mask for positive pressure ventilation. There are both cuffed and uncuffed 
tracheostomy tubes. If the tracheostomy does not have a cuff (balloon inflated in the trachea 
indicated by a side port), the airway is not protected against aspiration and air can leak out through 
the mouth during positive-pressure ventilation.  If respiratory failure occurs in a patient with an 
uncuffed tracheostomy tube, it should be replaced with a cuffed endotracheal tube if feasible in order 
to facilitate positive-pressure ventilation.  For bleeding direct pressure should be applied and 
suctioning as needed to reduce aspiration of blood. 
 
❹   The inner cannula is required to attach a ventilator or bag mask to a tracheostomy for positive-
pressure ventilation. It may become obstructed with secretions; remove, clean with saline, and 
replace once obstruction relieved.  
 
❺   Removal and reinsertion of the tracheostomy tube is contraindicated if the tracheostomy is < 1 week 
old because the stoma has not fully formed and a false tract may be created. Once the stoma has 
matured, a tracheostomy can be safely removed and replaced when necessary. If a flexible 
intubation guide (e.g., Bougie) can be inserted, it may be used to guide the removal and reinsertion 
of the tracheostomy or endotracheal tube.
