# 1040480 1229 PALOC2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) Ref. No. 1229-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for persistent ALOC of unclear etiology ❶ ❷        
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG if cardiac dysrhythmia detected and treat in conjunction with TP 1212-P, 
Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia or TP 1213-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia 
 
4. Establish vascular access (MCG 1375) 
 
5. Check blood glucose 
If < 60mg/dL or > 250mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203-P, Diabetic Emergencies  
 
6. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV/IO rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
 
For patients with persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, 
Shock/Hypotension  
 
7. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury 
 
8. Perform neurological exam 
If stroke or stroke mimic suspected CONTACT BASE and transport to PMC 
 
9. For suspected drug overdose or alcohol intoxication, treat in conjunction with                                                            
TP 1241-P, Overdose/Poisoning/Ingestion ❸ 
 
10. For suspected carbon monoxide exposure, treat in conjunction with                                              
TP 1238-P, Carbon Monoxide Exposure 
 
11. CONTACT BASE if the etiology of the ALOC remains unclear  
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) Ref. No. 1229-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶    Once the cause for ALOC is determined, switch to the more specific protocol.  
      Consider the following differential using the mnemonic AEIOU-TIPS: 
 
A – Alcohol, abuse, atypical migraine 
E – Epilepsy, electrolytes 
 I – Insulin (hypoglycemia) 
O – Oxygen, overdose 
U – Uremia (kidney failure) 
T – Trauma, tumor 
 I – Infection 
P – Psych, poisoning 
S – Seizure, Subarachnoid hemorrhage, Sepsis 
 
❷    EMS Personnel are mandated reporters of child abuse and neglect, and a report should be made 
when suspected as per Ref. 822. Communicate suspicion for child abuse and/or neglect to accepting 
ED staff when home suggests children could be at risk for harm (e.g., unkempt home, evidence of 
drug or alcohol abuse, unsafe living conditions, known or suspected domestic violence), when the 
history does not match with the severity of physical findings (e.g., child posturing after a roll off the 
couch), when patterned injury or burns or noted (e.g., circular burns as from a cigarette, whip marks 
on the skin, burns of both hands or feet), or when child reports physical or sexual abuse. Children < 3 
years of age and those with developmental delay are at increased risk of abuse. This must also be 
accompanied by notification to the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS). 
 
❸    Consider narcotic overdose for patients with hypoventilation (bradypnea), and pinpoint pupils, drug 
paraphernalia, or strong suspicion of narcotic use.
