# 1040379 1202GeneralMedical2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL MEDICAL Ref. No. 1202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2. Control external hemorrhage prn (MCG 1370) 
 
3. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
4. Assess for signs of trauma 
For traumatic injury, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury 
 
5. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG if cardiac ischemia suspected and treat per TP 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
 
6. For patients with dysrhythmias, treat per TP 1212, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia or TP 
1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia  
If patient with palpitations but normal sinus rhythm on 12-lead ECG – document Provider 
Impression as Palpitations 
 
7. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
8. Assess and document pain (MCG 1345) 
Consider the following Provider Impressions: 
If chest pain present without suspicion of cardiac cause – document Chest Pain – Not Cardiac ❶ 
If pain in neck or back without trauma – document Body Pain – Non-traumatic 
If headache and no report or signs of trauma – document Headache – Non-traumatic 
 
9. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
 
10. For nausea or vomiting: 
Ondansetron 4mg ODT/IV/IM, may repeat x 1 in 15 min prn and treat in conjunction with TP 
1205, GI/GU Emergencies 
 
11. For patients with complaints of weakness  
Assess neurologic exam; if focal findings present or stroke suspected treat per                           
TP 1232, Stroke/CVA/TIA 
If no focal weakness present and complaint of generalized weakness – document Provider 
Impression as Weakness – General 
 
12.  For patients with complaints of hypertension without other signs or symptoms – document 
Provider Impression as Hypertension ❷ 
 
13.  Consider the following Provider Impressions: 
If cold/cough symptoms without respiratory distress or wheezing – document Cold/Flu Symptoms 
If isolated pain or swelling in one or more extremities – document Extremity Pain/Swelling – Non-
traumatic ❸ 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL MEDICAL Ref. No. 1202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    When evaluating a patient for chest pain consider age, previous history of cardiac disease or MI, risk 
factors, and signs and symptoms to determine if cardiac chest pain suspected. Obtain a 12-lead ECG 
if age ≥ 35 years and/or patient has risk factors (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, high cholesterol, 
personal history of cardiac disease, or family history of early cardiac disease – defined as CAD/MI at 
age < 50 years old). 
 
❷    Hypertension in a pregnant or recently post-partum patient is a sign of eclampsia, which requires 
immediate emergency and obstetric care. Additional signs of eclampsia are edema and seizures.  
Patients who are ≥ 20 weeks pregnant or ≤ 6 weeks post-partum with hypertension (BP ≥ 
140/90mmHg) should be transported to the ED for evaluation.   
 
 
❸    For patients with bilateral swelling of lower extremities, evaluate for signs of congestive heart failure. 
Careful examination of breath sounds and vital signs, including respiratory rate and pulse oximetry, 
should be performed. If there are signs or symptoms of pulmonary edema, treat per TP 1214, 
Pulmonary Edema / CHF.
