# 1040387 1210CardiacArrest2018 05 30

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC ARREST Ref. No. 1210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 5 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for all cardiac arrest patients who do not meet criteria for 
determination of death per Ref. 814; Contact Base prior to transport unless ECPR criteria are met 
per MCG 1318 – contact ECPR Base en route. 
 
1. For patients meeting Ref. 814 Section I criteria for determination of death in the field – document 
Provider Impression as DOA – Obvious Death 
 
2. Resuscitate cardiac arrest patients on scene ❶ 
 
3. Initiate chest compressions at a rate of 100-120 per min, depth 2 inches or 5 cm ❷ 
Minimize interruptions in chest compressions 
 
4. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn ❸❹ (MCG 1302) 
Supraglottic airway (SGA), e.g., i-gel is the preferred advanced airway ❺ 
Monitor waveform capnography throughout resuscitation ❻ 
 
5. Administer high-flow Oxygen (15L/min) (MCG 1302) 
 
6. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Briefly assess rhythm every 2 minutes, minimizing pauses, or continuously via rhythm display 
technology ❼  
 
V-FIB/PULSELESS V-TACH: ❽ 
 
7. Defibrillate biphasic at 200J immediately or per manufacturer’s instructions 
Repeat at each 2-minute cycle as indicated 
If persistent shockable rhythm after three shocks, change the pad position when feasible ❾ 
 
8. Establish vascular access (MCG 1375) 
Establish IO if any delay in obtaining IV access 
 
9. Begin Epinephrine after defibrillation x2: 
Epinephrine (0.1mg/mL) administer 1mg (10mL) IV/IO  
Repeat every 5 min x2 additional doses; maximum total dose 3mg ❿ 
 
10. Prioritize transport for refractory VF/VT after defibrillation x2 in patients who meet ECPR criteria. 
Limit scene time to ≤15 minutes. (MCG 1318, Ref 516) 
 
11. After defibrillation x3 (for refractory or recurrent V-Fib/V-Tach without pulses): 
Amiodarone 300mg (6mL) IV/IO 
Repeat Amiodarone 150mg (3mL) IV/IO x1 prn after additional defibrillation x2, maximum total 
dose 450mg 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC ARREST Ref. No. 1210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 5 
 
 
 
ASYSTOLE/PEA: 
 
12. Epinephrine (0.1mg/mL) administer 1mg (10mL) IV/IO  
Repeat every 5 min x2; administer first dose as early as possible; maximum total dose 3mg ❿ 
 
CONTACT BASE to discuss additional epinephrine doses in cases where it may be indicated due 
to refractory PEA or recurrent arrest  
 
13. Consider and treat potential causes ⓫ 
 
14. Normal Saline 1L IV/IO rapid infusion 
Repeat x1 for persistent cardiac arrest  
For suspected hypovolemia, administer both liters simultaneously 
 
15. For patients with renal failure or other suspected hyperkalemia: ⓬ 
Calcium Chloride 1gm (10mL) IV/IO 
Sodium Bicarbonate 50mEq (50mL) IV/IO 
TERMINATION OF RESUSCITATION: 
 
16. If resuscitative efforts are unsuccessful and the patient does not meet ALL criteria for Termination 
of Resuscitation in Ref. 814, Section II.A., CONTACT BASE to consult with Base Physician ❽ 
 
RETURN OF SPONTANEOUS CIRCULATION (ROSC): 
 
17. Initiate post-resuscitation care immediately to stabilize the patient prior to transport ⓭⓮ 
 
18. For SBP < 90 mmHg:  
Normal Saline 1L IV/IO rapid infusion  
 
If no response after Normal Saline 250mL, or worsening hypotension and/or bradycardia: 
  
Push-dose Epinephrine – mix 9mL Normal Saline with 1mL Epinephrine 0.1mg/mL (IV 
formulation) in a 10mL syringe. Administer Push-dose Epinephrine (0.01mg/mL) 1mL IV/IO 
every 1-5 minutes as needed to maintain SBP > 90mmHg ⓰ 
 
19. Establish advanced airway prn ❺ 
 
20. Raise head of stretcher to 30 degrees if blood pressure allows, otherwise maintain supine 
 
21. Continue low volume ventilations at 10 per minute ⓯ 
 
22. Immediately resume CPR if patient re-arrests 
 
23. Perform 12-lead ECG and transmit to the SRC ⓱ 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC ARREST Ref. No. 1210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 5 
 
24. Check blood glucose  
For blood glucose < 60mg/dL 
Dextrose 10% 125mL IV and reassess 
If glucose remains < 60mg/dL, repeat 125 mL for a total of 250 mL 
 
25. For suspected narcotic overdose: ⓲ 
Naloxone 2-4mg (2-4mL) IV/IO/IM/IN (For IN, 1mg per nostril or 4mg/0.1mL IN if formulation 
available) 
Maximum dose all routes 8 mg 
 
26. Contact Public Health 213-989-7140 for all submersion incidents involving pools or spas after 
transfer of patient care in the emergency department or upon termination of resuscitation in the 
field (this requirement is effective 10/1/21). ⓳  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC ARREST Ref. No. 1210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 4 OF 5 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Maintaining perfusion with high-quality CPR throughout resuscitation is essential to ensuring good 
patient outcome. Transporting the patient in cardiac arrest causes interruptions in CPR and reduces 
CPR quality. Patients who are resuscitated until ROSC on scene have higher neurologically intact 
survival. 
 
❷    Chest compressions are the most important aspect of cardiac arrest resuscitation. Maintaining 
continuous chest compressions should take priority over any medication administration or transport.  
 
❸  Hyperventilation reduces venous return and worsens patient outcomes. Both continuous and 
interrupted (30:2) compressions/ventilations are acceptable. Regardless of ventilation method used, 
ventilations should be no more frequent than 10 per minute with appropriate volume, just enough to 
see chest rise.   
 
❹  Bag-mask ventilation (BMV) with a viral filter is the preferred initial method of airway management. 
BMV in cardiac arrest has been associated with improved patient outcomes and advanced airway 
placement should be deferred until after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) unless BMV is 
inadequate. If a decision is made to transport the patient in refractory cardiac arrest, place an 
advanced airway prior to transport. 
 
❺  Supraglottic airway (SGA), e.g., i-gel is the preferred advanced airway unless specifically 
contraindicated. Paramedics should use judgment based on patient characteristics, circumstances, 
and skill level when selecting the advanced airway modality. 
 
❻    ETCO
2
 should be > 10 with a “box-shaped” waveform during effective CPR. A flat or wavy waveform or 
ETCO
2
 < 10 may indicate ineffective compressions or airway obstruction. A sudden increase in ETCO
2
 
is suggestive of ROSC. The waveform can also be used to confirm ventilation rate if an advanced 
airway or asynchronous ventilation with continuous compressions is used. 
 
❼ If you are able to observe the underlying rhythm during compressions via rhythm display technology, 
do not pause for the rhythm check. In order to minimize pauses in chest compressions, pulse checks 
should only be performed during rhythm checks when there is an organized rhythm with signs of 
ROSC, such as normal capnography or sudden rise in capnography. 
 
❽    Patients in persistent cardiac arrest with refractory ventricular fibrillation (rVF) or EMS-witnessed arrest 
of presumed cardiac etiology may have a good outcome despite prolonged resuscitation. Early 
transport may be initiated using a mechanical compression device when routing a patient to a STEMI 
Receiving Center (SRC) for initiation of extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR). When 
ECPR is not available due to transport time or other criteria not met, resuscitation may be continued on 
scene for up to 40 minutes, as long as resources allow, in order to maximize the chances for field 
ROSC, which is strongly associated with improved survival with good neurologic outcome.  
 
❾ Changing the pad position, called vector change, from anterior-lateral to anterior-posterior or vice 
versa in patients who do not respond to initial defibrillation attempts, increases the chances of 
converting to a perfusing rhythm. 
 
❿ Epinephrine may improve outcomes if given early in non-shockable rhythms, but can worsen outcomes 
early in shockable rhythms, where defibrillation is the preferred initial treatment. Epinephrine is most 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC ARREST Ref. No. 1210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 5 OF 5 
likely to be effective if it is given early and after chest compressions have begun. The likelihood of 
meaningful survival declines after three (3) doses of epinephrine. Resuscitation should continue 
focused on quality CPR, defibrillation, and identifying reversible causes. Additional doses of 
epinephrine should only be administered with Base order. 
 
⓫ Potential causes that can be treated in the field include hypoxia, hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, 
hypothermia, toxins, and tension pneumothorax. Massive pulmonary embolism is a rare cause that 
may be treated with extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR). Hypoglycemia is a very 
rare cause of cardiac arrest and should not be assessed until after ROSC. If environmental 
hypothermia is suspected, resuscitation efforts should not be abandoned until the patient is re-
warmed, or after consultation with the Base Physician. 
 
   ⓬   Treat suspected hyperkalemia with calcium and sodium bicarbonate as soon as possible. The     
sooner it is administered, the more likely it is to be effective. Flush the line between medication 
administration. 
 
 ⓭   Approximately 40% of patients will re-arrest shortly after ROSC. Early indicators of impending re-arrest 
include falling EtCO
2
 and progressive bradycardia. Anticipate this decline as the epinephrine 
administered during the resuscitation begins to lose effect. Fluid resuscitation, vasopressor support, 
and avoidance of hyperventilation are recommended to decrease the risk of re-arrest.. These steps 
take approximately 5 minutes and should be initiated immediately after ROSC to stabilize the patient 
prior to transport to reduce chances of re-arrest en route.  
 
⓮ All cardiac arrest patients, with or without ROSC for whom the decision has been made to transport, 
shall be transported to an SRC if ground transport is 30 minutes or less, as initiation of targeted 
temperature management and early coronary angiography in a specialty center have been shown to 
improve outcomes.  
 
⓯ ETCO
2
 can help guide your ventilation rate; target ETCO
2
 35-45 mmHg. Just after ROSC, the ETCO
2
 
may be transiently elevated. This will decrease appropriately with ventilation and does not require 
hyperventilation to normalize. Persistently elevated ETCO
2
 and/or “sharkfin” waveform may indicate 
respiratory failure as cause of the cardiac arrest. Falsely low ETCO
2
 measurements can occur if there 
is a leak with BMV or shock. 
 
⓰ Push-dose Epinephrine is appropriate for non-traumatic shock including cardiogenic shock.  
Additional doses beyond 10mL may need to be prepared for prolonged transports.  
 
⓱ An ECG with STEMI after ROSC requires notification of ECG findings to the SRC. 
 
⓲ Narcotic overdose should be suspected in cases where there is drug paraphernalia on scene or there 
is a witness report.  Pinpoint pupils may be present, but hypoxia during cardiac arrest can cause 
mydriasis (dilated pupils) instead.  
 
⓳ EMS is assisting the Department of Public Health (DPH) in promptly investigating fatal or nonfatal 
drownings at public pools or spas in order to ensure safety can be verified before reopening. 
Contacting the on-call DPH officer will allow timely investigation of these incidents and prevent future 
incidents.
