# 1040408 1229ALOC2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) Ref. No. 1229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for persistent ALOC of unclear etiology. ❶  
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Assess level of consciousness per MCG 1320 
 
4. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG if cardiac ischemia suspected and treat in conjunction with                       
TP 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
 
5. Establish vascular access (MCG 1375) 
 
6. Check blood glucose 
If < 60mg/dL or > 400mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203, Diabetic Emergencies  
 
7. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion  
Reassess after each 250mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); stop 
infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
8. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury  
 
9. Perform mLAPSS 
If stroke is suspected, treat per TP 1232, Stroke/CVA/TIA 
 
10. For suspected drug overdose or alcohol intoxication, treat in conjunction with                                                            
TP 1241, Overdose/Poisoning/Ingestion ❷ 
 
11. For suspected carbon monoxide exposure, treat in conjunction with TP 1238, Carbon Monoxide 
Exposure 
 
12. CONTACT BASE if the etiology of the ALOC remains unclear 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) Ref. No. 1229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶    Consider all causes of ALOC using a mnemonic AEIOUTIPS: 
 
A – Alcohol, abuse, atypical migraine 
E – Epilepsy, electrolytes 
 I – Insulin (hypoglycemia) 
O – Oxygen, overdose 
U – Uremia (kidney failure) 
T – Trauma, tumor 
 I – Infection 
P – Psych, poisoning 
S – Seizure, Subarachnoid hemorrhage, Sepsis, Stroke 
 
Once the cause for ALOC is determined, switch to the more specific protocol. 
 
 
❷    Consider narcotic overdose for patients with hypoventilation (bradypnea), and pinpoint pupils, drug 
paraphernalia, or strong suspicion of narcotic use.
