# 1040421 1243TraumaticArrest2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: TRAUMATIC ARREST Ref. No. 1243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Contact the Trauma Center for patients not meeting criteria for 
determination of death per Ref 814.  
 
1. Prioritize rapid transport for patients who do not meet Ref. 814 ❶ 
 
2. Immediately control major bleeding (MCG 1370) 
Apply tourniquet prn 
 
3. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) ❷ 
Ventilate with high flow Oxygen 15 L/min 
 
4. Begin chest compressions 
 
5. Perform bilateral needle thoracostomy for suspected tension pneumothorax (MCG 1335) 
 
6. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Assess cardiac rhythm 
 
7. If shockable rhythm (V-Fib/V-Tach) identified:  
Defibrillate V-Fib/V-Tach at 200J or per manufacturer’s instructions 
 
For penetrating trauma: ❸ 
Defibrillate while prioritizing immediate transport 
 
For blunt trauma: ❹❺ 
Initiate resuscitation on scene  
If organized rhythm is not restored after defibrillation x3 or patient converts to 
nonshockable rhythm, refer to Ref. No. 814 for determination of death  
CONTACT BASE if needed for guidance on continued resuscitation or transport 
 
 
8. Provide spinal motion restriction (SMR) if indicated (MCG 1360) 
Do not delay transport for SMR ❻ 
 
9. Establish vascular access en route (MCG 1375) 
Two large bore IV catheters (16 or 18 gauge) preferred 
Establish IO if unable to establish IV access 
 
10. Normal Saline 2L IV/IO rapid infusion  
Administer through two sites simultaneously if possible 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: TRAUMATIC ARREST Ref. No. 1243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶     Rapid transport after hemorrhage control is the priority for all patients with severe trauma. With the 
exception of hemorrhage control, needle thoracostomy, and initiation of CPR, all other procedures 
may be deferred for immediate ambulance loading of patient and performed en route. 
 
❷    Bag-mask ventilation (BMV) with a viral filter is the preferred initial method of airway management. 
An advanced airway may be placed during transport or if BMV is difficult or ineffective. Supraglottic 
airway is preferred unless contraindicated. Paramedics should use judgment based on patient 
characteristics, circumstances, and skill level when selecting the advanced airway modality. 
 
❸     Patients with penetrating trauma should receive defibrillation while still prioritizing early transport. 
 
❹      Patients in cardiac arrest with hanging or submersion mechanisms are asphyxial in the large 
majority of cases and should be considered a medical cardiac arrest, and therefore managed in 
accordance with TP-1210-Cardiac Arrest with transport destination per Ref. No. 516. Trauma center 
destination in cases with ROSC should only be considered if there is strong evidence of cervical 
spine injury. 
 
❺ Sudden cardiac death can result from blunt cardiac injury (commotio cordis) triggering V-fib/V-tach.  
Unlike major trauma resulting in hemorrhagic shock, patients with this mechanism typically have 
minimal external trauma and should be treated with immediate defibrillation on scene.  Patients 
with multisystem blunt trauma in persistent cardiac arrest without organized rhythm should generally 
not be transported.  If commotio cordis is the suspected mechanism with minimal external trauma 
and the patient remains in V-fib/V-tach after three defibrillations, contact Base to discuss timing of 
transport versus termination for futility.  
 
❻      For patients in traumatic arrest, spinal motion restriction (SMR) using a backboard causes harmful 
delays in care. However, a backboard may be helpful to assist in patient movement and to support 
chest compressions.
