# 1040481 1230 PDizziness Vertigo2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: DIZZINESS / VERTIGO Ref. No. 1230-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
4. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
5. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, Shock/Hypotension 
 
6. Check blood glucose 
      If < 60mg/dL or > 250mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203-P, Diabetic Emergencies  
 
7. For vertigo: ❶ 
CONTACT BASE if focal neurologic findings present and transport to PMC 
 
8. For nausea or vomiting in patients ≥ 4 years old: 
Ondansetron 4mg ODT  
 
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: DIZZINESS / VERTIGO Ref. No. 1230-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Dizziness is often used to describe two different feelings; vertigo and lightheadedness. Vertigo is the 
sensation of a person or their surroundings moving when no actual movement is occurring. People 
often describe the feeling of spinning, falling, tilting, or being off balance. This is often associated with 
nausea/vomiting.  Lightheadedness can lead to feeling faint or syncope, and the patient often reports 
improvement with supine position. Vertigo is an unusual complaint for children and should be taken 
as a possible sign of serious disease.
