# 1040378 1201Assessment2018 04 30

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ASSESSMENT Ref. No. 1201 
 
 
 
 
 
 REVISED: 10-01-23 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Use appropriate PPE precautions – gloves for all patients and additional protective equipment prn 
(MCG 1357) 
 
2. Assess scene for potential hazards and number of adult and pediatric patients  
 
3. Activate additional resources prn (e.g. EMS personnel, HAZMAT, law enforcement) 
 
4. Perform patient assessment to determine Provider Impression. Refer to appropriate Treatment 
Protocol(s) to guide patient management (Ref. 1200, Treatment Protocols Table of Contents)  
 
5. For pediatric patients, assessment should be performed per MCG 1350 and include 
determination of the patient’s weight in kg (MCG 1309) ❶ 
 
6. If after complete assessment there is no medical or psychiatric complaint and no signs of trauma 
or illness – document No Medical Complaint ❷ 
 
7. CONTACT BASE if difficulty in determining Provider Impression or appropriate protocol to use 
 
8. Continue assessment and treat per TP 1202/1202-P, General Medical until the Provider 
Impression is established, at which point the appropriate treatment protocol should be used in 
conjunction with TP 1202/1202-P 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ASSESSMENT Ref. No. 1201 
 
 
 
 
 
 REVISED: 10-01-23 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶EMS personnel are mandated reporters of child abuse and neglect, and a report should be made when 
suspected as per Ref. 822. Communicate suspicion for child abuse and/or neglect to accepting ED 
staff when home suggests children could be at risk for harm (e.g., unkempt home, evidence of drug 
or alcohol abuse, unsafe living conditions, known or suspected domestic violence), when the history 
does not match with the severity of physical findings (e.g., child posturing after a roll off the couch), 
when patterned injury or burns are noted (e.g., circular burns as from a cigarette, whip marks on the 
skin, burns of both hands or feet), or when child reports physical or sexual abuse. Children < 3 years 
of age and those with developmental delay are at increased risk of abuse.  This must also be 
accompanied by notification to the Department of Children and Family Service (DCFS). 
 
❷  Parents/caregivers can be concerned about signs and symptoms in children which may not show at 
the time of paramedic assessment.  This does not exclude the possibility that an emergency exists. If 
there are no physical signs and the complaint does not otherwise have a provider impression 
associated with it - document No Medical Complaint. 
      
If parents/caregivers have ongoing concerns these patients require transport to an EDAP for    
evaluation.
