# 1040399 1219Allergy2018 05 30

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALLERGY Ref. No. 1219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for anaphylaxis.  
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
Continually assess patient’s airway and ventilation status 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
High flow Oxygen 15 L/min for anaphylaxis with poor perfusion or airway compromise 
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
4. For anaphylaxis: 
Epinephrine (1mg/mL) administer 0.5mg (0.5mL) IM in the lateral thigh ❶ 
CONTACT BASE: Repeat as above every 10 min x2 prn persistent symptoms, maximum total 3 
doses 
 
5. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
Vascular access for all patients with anaphylaxis 
 
6. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops. 
 
7. For persistent poor perfusion after initial 250 mL Normal Saline (anaphylactic shock): 
Continue Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Push-dose Epinephrine – mix 9mL Normal Saline with 1mL Epinephrine (0.1mg/mL) IV 
formulation in a 10mL syringe; administer Push-dose Epinephrine (0.01mg/mL) 1mL IV/IO 
every 1-5 minutes as needed to maintain SBP > 90mmHg until hospital arrival  
CONTACT BASE concurrent with initial dose of Push-dose Epinephrine  
Treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
8. If wheezing: ❷ 
Albuterol 5mg (6mL) via neb or 4 puffs via MDI 
Repeat x2 prn, maximum total prior to Base contact 3 doses 
 
9. For itching/hives: 
Diphenhydramine 50mg (1mL) slow IV push one time ❸ 
If unable to obtain venous access, Diphenhydramine 50mg (1mL) deep IM 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ALLERGY Ref. No. 1219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    Epinephrine is the drug of choice for allergic reactions with any one of the following: angioedema, 
respiratory compromise or poor perfusion. It should be given IM into a large muscle group, lateral 
thigh preferred or alternatively the lateral gluteus. 
 
❷    Patients with wheezing due to allergic reaction should be treated with Epinephrine IM. Albuterol may 
be administered in addition to Epinephrine IM if wheezing persists. 
 
❸ Diphenhydramine does not treat anaphylaxis.  For patients in anaphylaxis, Epinephrine 
administration is the first priority. Diphenhydramine may be considered once other treatments are 
complete or in stable patients with discomfort for isolated hives.
