# 1040388 1211CardiacChestPain2018 04 25

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC CHEST PAIN Ref. No. 1211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Notify the closest STEMI Receiving Center (SRC) as soon as STEMI is identified. Notification shall 
be in accordance with MCG 1303 and include immediate ECG transmission initiated prior to 
contact. 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) ❶ 
Assess cardiac rhythm and obtain 12-lead ECG ❷ 
Transmit the ECG to the receiving SRC if STEMI is suspected (MCG 1303) 
 
4. For patients with dysrhythmias, treat in conjunction with TP 1212, Bradycardia or                        
TP 1213, Tachycardia  
 
5. Aspirin 325mg chewable tablets PO if alert ❸ 
 
6. For chest pain after 12-lead ECG: 
  Nitroglycerin 0.4mg SL prn ❹❺ 
Repeat every 5 min prn x2, total of 3 doses 
Hold if SBP < 100mmHg or patient has taken sexually enhancing medication within 48hrs  
 
7. Establish vascular access (MCG 1375) 
 
8. For persistent chest pain after, or contraindication to, nitroglycerin: refer to MCG 1345, Pain 
Management❺ 
 
9. For nausea or vomiting:  
Ondansetron 4mg ODT/IV/IM, may repeat x1 in 15 min prn 
 
10. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CARDIAC CHEST PAIN Ref. No. 1211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶ Patients may have a myocardial infarction (MI) with or without ST elevations on the ECG. You should 
review and interpret the ECG; the software interpretation is not always accurate. Include your 
impression of the patient and interpretation of the ECG when discussing destination decision with the 
base. Patients with ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) require emergent treatment with 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in the catheterization lab to improve survival, so they 
require field routing directly to a STEMI center (SRC). If artifact inhibits your ability to interpret the 
ECG, the software cannot read it either. ECGs of such poor quality as to inhibit interpretation should 
not be used to determine destination and should be repeated. 
 
❷ Obtain the ECG as soon as possible with initial vital signs.  For patients in whom you have a high 
clinical suspicion for STEMI and the initial ECG does not meet STEMI criteria, you should repeat the 
ECG prior to transport and at any point that the patient’s clinical status changes. Repeating the ECG 
increases your chances of detecting an evolving STEMI. Consider repeating the ECG in cases where 
you have a low clinical suspicion and the initial ECG software interpretation is STEMI, particularly if 
there is artifact present that may affect the interpretation. 
 
❸ Aspirin is the most important medication for patients with acute myocardial infarction to improve 
outcomes and should be administered as soon as possible. All patients with cardiac chest pain 
should receive aspirin unless contraindicated due to active gastrointestinal bleeding or allergy, even if 
they already took aspirin at home or are prescribed anticoagulant medications. While there are other 
causes of chest pain that can present similarly to an MI, including aortic dissection, these causes are 
rare and the benefit of aspirin for patients with MI outweighs the risks of administration.   
 
❹  Nitroglycerin can cause a severe drop in blood pressure in some patients and, while useful for      
treatment of pain, it has not been shown to improve survival. Use caution in patients with borderline 
or relative hypotension (patients with history of hypertension or taking antihypertensive medications 
and SBP < 110) and/or patients with abnormal heart rate < 50 or > 120. It is acceptable to hold 
nitroglycerin in these patients. Inferior MI alone is not a contraindication to nitroglycerin. 
 
❺ Morphine or fentanyl is preferred for the treatment of cardiac chest pain that does not respond to 
nitroglycerin or when nitroglycerin is contraindicated; do not administer ketorolac. Morphine or 
fentanyl is also preferred over nitroglycerin to treat pain in patients with suspected aortic dissection. 
The classic presentation of acute aortic dissection is acute onset “tearing” chest pain radiating to the 
back. Other findings that raise concern for aortic dissection are chest pain associated with new focal 
neurologic abnormalities or with a difference in SBP of 20mmHg or more between arms. The primary 
treatment goal in the alert patient is to decrease heart rate by alleviating pain and anxiety. These 
patients are most often hypertensive. Treat hypotension only if SBP is < 90mmHg in both arms or if 
patient has other signs of poor perfusion.
