# 1040490 1239 PDystonicReaction2018 04 24

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: DYSTONIC REACTION Ref. No. 1239-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 01-26-21 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact Required. 
 
1.   Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2.   Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
3.   Assess for medication exposure as the potential cause of the dystonic reaction 
❶ ❷ 
 
4. CONTACT BASE to confirm Provider Impression of Dystonic Reaction 
 
5. Diphenhydramine (50mg/mL) 1mg/kg slow IV push, dose per MCG 1309 
If unable to obtain venous access, Diphenhydramine (50mg/mL) 1mg/kg deep IM, dose per     
MCG 1309 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: DYSTONIC REACTION Ref. No. 1239-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 01-26-21 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶   The table below shows common medications that can cause an acute dystonic reaction.  
 
Generic Name Trade Name General Use 
Prochlorperazine  Compazine Antiemetic, migraine headache 
Hydroxyzine Vistaril, Atarax Antiemetic, antipruritic 
Promethazine Phenergan Antiemetic, antipsychotic 
Haloperidol Haldol Antipsychotic, Tourette’s syndrome 
Thioridazine Mellaril Antipsychotic 
Alprazolam Xanax Antianxiety 
Metoclopramide Reglan Antiemetic 
Droperidol Inapsine Antiemetic, antipsychotic 
Fluphenazine                       Prolixin                       Neuralgia,                       antipsychotic                       
 
  
❷   Signs and symptoms of a dystonic reaction include anxiety, agitation and associated involuntary 
muscle spasms of the head, neck, face, eyes or trunk. This often results in an inability to retract the 
tongue into the mouth, forced jaw opening, facial grimacing, and/or eye deviation.
