# 1040396 1215ChildbirthMother2018 04 29

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CHILDBIRTH (MOTHER) Ref. No. 1215 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
Base Hospital Contact Required. ❶ 
 
1. Assess the mother’s airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 
1302) 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
Vascular access should not take precedence over controlled delivery or emergency transport 
 
4. Place mother in Semi-Fowler’s or Lateral Sims position 
 
5. If mother has the urge to push or crowning is evident, prepare for delivery 
Prepare OB kit  
 
6. If crown is showing with amniotic sac intact, pinch sac and twist the membrane to rupture 
 
7. If maternal hypertension, breech presentation, shoulder dystocia, or prolapsed or nuchal cord 
treat in conjunction with TP 1217, Pregnancy Complication 
 
8. Once delivered, dry newborn with a towel, clamp and cut the cord ❷ 
Treat newborn per TP 1216-P, Newborn/Neonate Resuscitation 
 
9. For management of the placenta: 
The placenta may deliver spontaneously; do not pull on cord but allow placenta to separate 
naturally 
Place placenta in plastic bag from the OB kit and bring to the hospital with the mother  
 
10. Massage the mother’s lower abdomen (fundus) after the placenta delivers  
For post-partum hemorrhage, treat in conjunction with TP 1217, Pregnancy Complication ❸ 
 
11. For signs of poor perfusion (MCG 1355) in mother: 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
CONTACT BASE for persistent poor perfusion to obtain order for additional Normal Saline 1L IV 
 
12. If delivery occurs in the field, determine destination based on stated or estimated gestational age 
and CONTACT BASE: ❶ 
Transport both patients to a Perinatal Center with an EDAP if newborn > 34 weeks gestation 
Transport both patients to a Perinatal Center with an EDAP and a NICU if ≤34 weeks gestation 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: CHILDBIRTH (MOTHER) Ref. No. 1215 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶ Any delivery after the first trimester (12 weeks) should be considered childbirth for the purposes of 
this treatment protocol and paramedics should contact Base to discuss the management and 
transport.  In general, delivery prior to 20 weeks gestation is nonviable and does not require 
resuscitation. However, dates can be incorrectly estimated, therefore, Base Contact is strongly 
encouraged.  Any potentially viable birth should be resuscitated in the field and transported to a 
perinatal center that is also an EDAP (with a NICU if ≤34 weeks gestation).  Births prior to 20 weeks 
do not necessarily require specialty center care and can be transported to the MAR. 
 
❷    Delay in clamping and cutting the cord for up 30 to 60 seconds is recommended unless newborn  
needs immediate resuscitation 
 
❸    Some bleeding is normal during delivery, typically up to 500mL. Bleeding is reduced with fundal 
massage after placental delivery, which promotes contraction of the uterus. Post-partum hemorrhage 
is defined as blood loss with signs of poor perfusion and/or cumulative blood loss ≥1000mL.
