# 1053953 1317.35 Oxygen2018 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – OXYGEN Ref. No. 1317.35 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Gas 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Multiple provider impressions: hypoxia SPO
2
 <94% on room air, respiratory or cardiac arrest, shock, 
anaphylaxis, traumatic brain injury, carbon Monoxide exposure/poisoning/toxicity, suspected pneumothorax 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
Chronic hypoxia in patients with restrictive lung disease 
 
Adult and Pediatric Dose 
Delivery Device Flow Rate % Delivered 
Nasal Cannula 1-6 L/min 22-44% 
Simple Face Mask 8-10 L/min 40-60% 
Face Mask with O
2
 Reservoir 15 L/min 90% 
Bag-Mask with O
2
 Reservoir 15 L/min 90% 
ET with Bag with O
2
 Reservoir 15 L/min 100% 
ET with T-Tube 15 L/min 70% 
Supraglottic Airway  15 L/min 90% 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Oxygen is a tasteless, odorless gas transported by hemoglobin in the blood to organ tissues. It is required 
for the breakdown of glucose into a useable energy form (aerobic metabolism). Therapeutic oxygen 
administration increases the oxygen concentration in the alveoli, which in turn increases the oxygen 
saturation of available hemoglobin. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is immediate; duration is < 2 min 
 
Contraindications 
None 
 
Adverse Effects 
High flow O
2 
(100%) by mask may produce a 30% decrease in coronary blood flow in as little as 5 min, and 
may decrease the efficiency of nitroglycerin. 
In patients with COPD or other chronic lung disease, high inspired O
2
 concentration may decrease 
respiratory drive and cause CO
2
 retention. 
O
2
 will dry mucus membranes.
