# 1053952 1317.33 Ondansetron2018 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – ONDANSETRON Ref. No. 1317.33 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24                                      PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Antiemetic 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Multiple provider impressions: Nausea and/or vomiting, or prior to fentanyl or morphine administration to 
reduce potential for nausea/ vomiting 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
None 
 
Adult Dose 
4 mg ODT/IV/IM, may repeat x1 in 15 min prn 
Pediatric Dose  
4 mg ODT, only for 4 years of age or older 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Mechanism of action has not been fully characterized but believed to function via serotonin antagonism at 
central and/or peripheral receptors. Serotonin receptors of the 5-HT3 type are present both peripherally on 
vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area of the medullary structure 
that controls vomiting. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is 1-5 min; duration is 4-6 hr 
 
Contraindications 
Known allergy to Ondansetron 
Pregnancy, regardless of gestational age 
 
Interactions 
Amiodarone and other QT prolonging drugs (additive prolongation of QT may produce torsade de 
pointes/polymorphic ventricular tachycardia) 
 
Adverse Effects 
Constipation 
Headache 
QT prolongation 
Sedation 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• May cause prolonged QT interval. Caution in patients with known prolonged QT syndrome or 
recent/simultaneous use of other QT-prolonging drugs. 
• Should not be administered in patients known to be pregnant, regardless of gestational age. 
• Peak activity is decreased by approximately 40% in oral administration, compared to IV, due to first 
pass metabolism in the liver.
