# 1053944 1317.23 Lidocaine2018 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – LIDOCAINE Ref. No. 1317.23 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24                                       PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Local Anesthetic 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Multiple provider impressions: patients responsive to pain that have intraosseous (IO) access 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
Topical, transmucosal or intradermal anesthesia 
Ventricular arrhythmias refractory to other treatments 
 
Adult Dose 
2% 40mg slow IO push over 2 minutes; may give second dose of 20 mg x1 prn 
Pediatric Dose 
2% 0.5mg/kg (20mg/mL) slow IO push over 2 minutes, dose per MCG 1309, not to exceed adult dose; 
may repeat second dose at half the initial dose x1 prn 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Inhibits sodium ion channels, stabilizing neuronal cell membranes causing a nerve conduction blockage 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is 2 min; peak in 3-5 min; duration is 10-20 min 
 
Contraindications 
None, when used for anesthesia in IO placement 
 
Interactions 
No significant interaction at therapeutic doses for IO placement. In larger doses, multiple interactions 
possible including potentiation of fentanyl and amiodarone. 
 
Adverse Effects 
None for IO use, high doses have been associated with increased risk of seizure 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• This should be given pre-infusion if IV fluids or infusion of other medications through the IO on patients 
that are responsive to pain. 
• Lidocaine 2% (preservative and epinephrine free) should be used. 
• Slow infusion is necessary to ensure the lidocaine remains in the medullary space. 
• A base order is not needed to administer lidocaine as part of the IO procedure.
