# 1053470 1200.1GeneralInstructions2018 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS Ref. No. 1200.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
The Treatment Protocols were developed to be consistent with EMS Provider Impressions as approved 
by the California EMS Authority.  The foundations for the revised guidelines are the EMT and paramedic 
scope of practice, medical research, and community standards in medical practice.  
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
1. Patients with the same disease may have differing symptoms and presentations, and conversely, 
patients with similar signs and symptoms may have very different diagnoses. 
 
2. The Treatment Protocols guide treatment of “classic” presentations based on evidence-based 
practice. EMTs, Paramedics, mobile intensive care nurses (MICNs) and Base hospital physicians 
must utilize their medical knowledge, expertise and critical thinking to determine appropriate 
treatment for each patient. 
 
3. The protocols were not developed with the intent that all therapies be done on scene. Transport 
of patients with treatment en route is left to the discretion of the field unit and the Base hospital. 
 
4. The protocols incorporate EMS policies that address EMT and Paramedic Scope of Practice, 
Procedures Prior to Base Contact, Base Hospital Contact, and Standing Field Treatment 
Protocols.  Assessments and treatments recommended would be carried out by an EMT and/or a 
paramedic based on their scope of practice.  
 
5. Treatments may be ordered by Mobile Intensive Care Nurses (MICNs) providing online medical 
direction as indicated in the protocols. In addition, MICNs may provide orders for pain 
management per their clinical judgment up to a maximum adult total dose of Fentanyl 250mcg or 
Morphine 20mg or, for pediatrics, Fentanyl or Morphine up to a maximum of 4 total doses per 
MCG 1309. 
 
PROTOCOL FORMAT 
 
1. Pharmacologic agents are in BOLD typeface. 
 
2. In general, each protocol will have a corresponding pediatric specific protocol. The pediatric 
protocols are identified with a letter “P” at the end of the protocol number and have the Los 
Angeles County teddy bear symbol.  
 
3. In preparation for an on-line mobile application, the protocols were developed to provide linkages 
to additional helpful information specific to the provider impression and/or specific patient 
population, such as the Medical Control Guidelines (MCG) and patient destination policies. These 
are indicated in BLUE in the protocols as hyperlinks. 
 
USING THE TREATMENT PROTOCOLS 
 
1. Utilize Ref. No. 1201, Assessment as a starting point until a Provider Impression is established. 
 
2. If more than one treatment protocol applies, begin by using the one most closely associated with 
the patient’s symptoms and prioritize interventions based on your judgment.   
 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS Ref. No. 1200.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 3 
Based on the patient’s presentation and the assessment, the EMT or Paramedic determines 
his/her Provider Impression.  In general, Provider Impressions are categorized according to body 
systems.  Each Provider Impression has a corresponding Treatment Protocol.   
 
BODY SYSTEM 
 Provider Impression/Protocol Name  Protocol Number 
 
A Treatment Protocol may be applicable to more than one Provider Impression.  Also, rarely, a 
Provider Impression may be further divided into more than one Treatment Protocol, e.g. 
management for the Provider Impression ‘Cardiac Dysrhythmia’ is guided by TP 1212, Cardiac 
Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia or TP 1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia depending on the 
dysrhythmia. 
 
3. Refer to the appropriate Treatment Protocol(s) to guide patient treatment. The treatment protocol 
sequence is intended to guide the priority in which interventions are administered but not to imply 
a strict order as priorities in an individual patient may differ. 
 
4. If the patient’s status changes, a different treatment protocol might be needed. When using the 
new treatment protocol, take into account the treatments already performed. 
 
5. These protocols are designed for the Paramedic however, the EMT provider may use these 
protocols based on their scope of practice and should contact ALS when indicated by their 
assessment as per Ref. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice and Ref 
1200.4, BLS Upgrade to ALS Assessment.  
 
6. All pediatric patients must be measured using a length-based resuscitation tape (e.g., 
Broselow) and the identified color code and weight in kilograms must be reported when 
contacting the Base hospital. The color code and weight in kilograms must be documented for all 
pediatric patients in the patient weight section of the EMS Patient Care Record (ePCR or EMS 
Report Form). Medication dosages are determined by correlating the length-based resuscitation 
tape color code with the appropriate weight on the Medical Control Guideline (MCG 1309), Color 
Code Drug Doses/L.A. County Kids chart. If the child is longer than the length-based resuscitation 
tape, use adult dosing. 
 
7. A full patient report must be given: 1) If Base hospital contact is made to obtain patient care 
orders or 2) if the patient meets trauma criteria or guidelines but is being transported to a non-
trauma hospital. Once Base hospital contact is made for medical control the overall authority for 
the patient’s medical care lies with the Base. The treatment plan should be developed 
collaboratively by EMS and Base personnel. Treatments outlined in the applicable protocol may 
be administered by EMS personnel and communicated to the Base.  
 
8. Paramedic verbal report to the Base hospital and/or receiving hospital shall be in accordance with 
Ref. 1340, Medical Control Guideline: Online Medical Control and Receiving Hospital Notification. 
 
CONTACT THE BASE HOSPITAL as specified in Ref. 1200.2, Base Contact Requirements 
 
TRANSPORT ALS when either of the following conditions apply: 
 
1. Need for immediate and ongoing ALS intervention (excluding need for a single administration of 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS Ref. No. 1200.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 3 
medication for symptomatic relief, i.e., morphine, fentanyl, ondansetron) 
 
2. Potential for deterioration en route including but not limited to abnormal vital signs 
 
NOTIFY THE RECEIVING HOSPITAL to expedite care of ALL ALS patients to ensure 9-1-1 receiving 
facilities are prepared with the appropriate resources to receive the patient and to reduce ambulance 
patient offload time (APOT).   
 
1. When operating on treatment protocols without online medical control, paramedics will notify the 
receiving hospital directly. 
 
2. When Base Contact is made, Base personnel will notify the receiving hospital.
