# 1053948 1317.29 Noloxone2019 04 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – NALOXONE Ref. No. 1317.29 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Opiate Antagonist 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications  
Overdose / Poisoning/ Ingestion: suspected opiate overdose with altered mental status and 
hypoventilation/apnea  
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
None 
 
Adult Dose 
2-4 mg IN (1mg per nostril or 4mg/0.1mL IN depending on formulation available) or 2mg IM or 0.8-2mg IV 
push 
Maximum dose all routes 8mg, titrate to adequate respiratory rate and tidal volume 
Pediatric Dose 
0.1mg/kg (1mg/mL) IM/IN/IV, dose per MCG 1309, or 2-4 mg IN if using pre-packaged nasal spray 
(1mg per nostril or 4mg/0.1 mL IN depending on formulation available); excludes newborns 
Maximum dose all routes 8mg, titrate to adequate respiratory rate and tidal volume 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Competes for and displaces narcotic molecules from opiate receptors in the brain. Reverses the respiratory 
depression associated with overdose of narcotic agents. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is < 2 min IV, 2-10min IM; duration is 20-120 min 
 
Contraindications 
Hypersensitivity 
 
Interactions 
None 
 
Adverse Effects 
Nausea and vomiting 
Sweating 
Tachycardia 
Agitation 
Hypertension 
Abdominal pain 
Acute pulmonary edema 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• Give in small increments until the desired narcotic reversal is achieved (respiratory rate 12 and 
adequate tidal volume). 
• Duration of action of some narcotics may exceed that of naloxone; therefore, patient must be closely 
observed for need for repeat doses. 
• Naloxone causes acute withdrawal symptoms and can precipitate acute pulmonary edema when given 
in large boluses to narcotic addicts. Use only enough to reverse respiratory depression. 
• Naloxone is not indicated in cardiac arrest though can be given after ROSC if narcotic overdose 
suspected. 
• Higher dose pre-packaged nasal spray should not be used in the newborn/neonate due to potential risk 
to precipitate withdrawal.
