# 1053422 1317.1 Adenosine2018 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – ADENOSINE Ref. No. 1317.1 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24  PAGE 1 OF 2 
Classification 
 Antidysrthythmic 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications  
Cardiac Dysrhythmia: 
SVT - Narrow Complex: HR ≥ 150 for adults; ≥180 for a child; and ≥220 for infants 
Perfusing unresponsive to Valsalva 
Alert patients with poor perfusion 
Regular/Monomorphic Wide Complex Tachycardia 
Adequate perfusion 
Alert patients with poor perfusion 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
Used in hospital setting as part of drug combination for cardiac “stress testing” and diagnosis of pulmonary 
hypertension 
 
Adult Dose 
6 or 12mg rapid IVP (per protocol), within 1-3 seconds, followed by a rapid flush of 10mL of NS  
If no conversion after 1-2 minutes, may repeat 12mg rapid IVP followed by rapid flush of 10mL of NS. 
Pediatric Dose 
0.1mg/kg (3mg/mL) rapid IVP, dose per MCG 1309, maximum first dose 6mg, followed by a rapid flush of 
10mL NS 
If no conversion after 1-2 minutes, may repeat one time 0.2mg/kg (3mg/mL) followed by a rapid flush of 
10mL NS, dose per MCG 1309, maximum second dose12mg 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Slows conduction through the AV node and interrupts AV reentry pathways as well as conduction through 
the sinoatrial (SA) nodes 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset immediate, Duration < 10 secs 
 
Contraindications 
Sinus tachycardia  
2
nd
 and 3
rd
 degree heart block without pacemaker 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) Syndrome and atrial fibrillation (wide-complex, irregular rhythm) 
Sinus Node Disease (Sick Sinus Syndrome) 
Heart transplant  
 Use of carbamazepine (Tegretol) for seizure disorder 
 
Interactions 
Potentiated by blocker of nucleoside transport [e.g., carbamazepine (Tegretol)] 
Antagonized by methylxanthines such as caffeine and theophylline 
 
Adverse Effects 
Blurred vision 
Bradycardia / Asystole 
Chest pain / Chest pressure 
Dyspnea 
Head pressure 
Hypotension 
Lightheadedness / Dizziness 
Metallic taste / Throat tightness 
Numbness / Tingling 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – ADENOSINE Ref. No. 1317.1 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24  PAGE 2 OF 2 
Palpitations 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• Cannulate a large proximal vein with an 18-20g catheter. Use IV port closest to patient and immediately 
flush with 10mL Normal Saline to ensure rapid administration of drug. 
• Run a 6 second ECG strip before, during and after drug administration. 
• Patients usually have a 10 second period of escape beats or asystole before the sinus node starts up 
again. This is perceived as a feeling of impending death and can be extremely frightening for patients. 
• If the wide-complex tachycardia is ventricular in origin, Adenosine is highly unlikely to cause successful 
cardioversion.
