# 1061938 412.2AEDAnnualReport10 01 19

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER ANNUAL REPORT REFERENCE NO. 412.2 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-88 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 10-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-13 
AED SERVICE PROVIDER ANNUAL REPORT 
As required by State law and local polices, the following statistical information is 
required on an annual basis, due by March 31
st
 for the previous calendar year.  
 
AED Service Provider Name: _______________________________________________________ 
Reporting period: ________________________________________________________________ 
1. Population served (estimate): __________________ 
2. Number of responses to patients where an AED was used initially: __________ 
 
(To include initial AED use only, including use before ALS arrival.  DO NOT include 
responses where only paramedic/ALS manual defibrillation was used.  This information will 
be captured in the patient care records for ALS responses.) 
3. Number of resuscitations attempted: __________ 
4. Number of resuscitations not attempted: __________ 
 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field, valid Do-Not-Resuscitate 
(DNR), Advanced Health Care Directive (AHCD), Physicians Orders for Life Sustaining 
Treatment (POLST), personal physician, or family at scene requesting to withholding 
resuscitation efforts.
 
5. Number of patients on whom an AED was applied: __________ 
6. Total number WITNESSED arrest (seen or heard by AED provider personnel):   __________ 
 
a) Number who received bystander CPR prior to 
arrival of emergency medical care 
__________ 
b) Number with initial rhythm of V-Fib or V-Tach (AED 
indicated shock advised with initial application) 
__________ 
c) Number who received a shock from an AED 
operated by the AED service provider 
__________ 
7. Total number UNWITNESSED arrest (prior to arrival of AED provider personnel): __________ 
 
a) Number who received bystander CPR prior to 
arrival of emergency medical care 
__________ 
b) Number with initial rhythm of V-Fib or V-Tach (AED 
indicated shock advised with initial application) 
__________ 
c) Number who received a shock from an AED 
operated by the AED service provider 
__________ 
 

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER ANNUAL REPORT REFERENCE NO. 412.2 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
8. Problems associated with AED operation or application:     Yes    No 
 
If you answered yes, check appropriate box below and provide additional information.  
 
a) Equipment failure 
Machine shocks rhythm other than V-Fib or V-Tach     
No discharge           
Tape/Battery Malfunction        
Other             
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
   b) Lack of skill proficiency          Yes   No 
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
9. Name of MD, RN, PA, or Paramedic primary reviewer of AED application (s):  
__________________________________________________________________________ 
Contact number: ________________________  Email address: ___________________ 
10. Manufacturer/Model of the AEDs: _______________________________________________ 
 
Number of AEDs in Service: ______________ Pediatric Pads  Yes   No 
 
11. Number of personnel by level authorized to use AEDs within your agency: 
 
a) EMT: ___________  
b) Public Safety personnel (Non-EMT): ___________  
(Peace Officers, Lifeguards and Firefighters) 
c) Non-licensed/non-certified personnel: ___________  
(Lay public/employees) 
 
12. Frequency of individual AED/CPR skills competency verification: 
 
  Every 2 years (EMT only)   Annually       Every 6 months  Other: _____________  
 
AED Program Coordinator: ______________________________ Title: _____________________  
 
Email: ___________________________________   Contact Number: _________________  
 
AED Program Coordinator's Signature: ____________________________  Date: _________  
 
Submit report via mail, e-mail or fax to:  
Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
Attn: AED Coordinator 
10100 Pioneer Blvd, Suite 200 
Santa Fe Springs, CA  90670 
e-mail: aedprograms@dhs.lacounty.gov 
Fax: (562) 941-5835
