# 1068614 1305 Capnography

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES (PARAMEDIC, MICN, EMT) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 04-01-20                                                              PAGE 1 OF 6 
REVISED:  
SUPERSEDES:  
Medical Control Guideline: CAPNOGRAPHY 
 
PURPOSE: To describe use of capnography for 911 responses and for inter-facility transfers. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Capnography: Analysis and recording of carbon dioxide (CO
2
) concentrations in respiratory 
gases via continuous waveform.   
 
Capnometry: Measurement of the amount of carbon dioxide in exhaled air.  This gives a 
specific value for the end-tidal CO
2
 measurement. 
 
Colorimetric CO
2
 device: Device that changes color due to a chemical reaction in the 
presence of CO
2
, which can be used to detect CO
2
 in exhaled air in order to confirm placement 
of an advanced airway. 
 
End-Tidal CO
2
 (ETCO
2
): The amount of carbon dioxide measured at the end of exhalation. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1.   Ventilation is an active process, which is assessed with end-tidal CO
2
 measurement. 
End-tidal CO
2
 measurement is an indication of air movement in and out of the lungs. The 
normal value of exhaled CO
2
 is 35-45mmHg. 
 
2.   Oxygenation is a passive process, which occurs by diffusion of oxygen across the 
alveolar membrane into the blood. The amount of oxygen available in the bloodstream is 
assessed with pulse oximetry.   
 
3.   Capnography provides both a specific value for the end-tidal CO
2
 measurement and a 
continuous waveform representing the amount of CO
2
 in the exhaled air. A normal 
capnography waveform is square, with a slight upslope to the plateau phase during 
exhalation. (See figures below) The height of the waveform at its peak corresponds to 
the ETCO
2
. 
 
4.   Capnography is necessary to monitor ventilation. For patients requiring positive pressure 
ventilation, capnography is most accurate with proper mask seal (two-hand mask hold 
for adults during bag-mask ventilation) or with an advanced airway. 
 
5.   Capnography can also be applied via a nasal cannula device to measure end-tidal CO
2
 
in the spontaneously breathing patient. It is useful to monitor for hypoventilation, in 
patients who are sedated either due to ingestion of substances or treatment with 
medication with sedative properties such as midazolam or opioids. In a patient with 
suspected sepsis, an ETCO
2
 <25mmHg further supports this provider impression. 
 
6.   Capnography is standard of care for confirmation of advanced airway placement. Unlike 
simple colorimetric devices, capnography is also useful to monitor the airway position 
over time, for ventilation management, and for early detection of return of spontaneous 
circulation (ROSC) in patients in cardiac arrest.   
 
7.   Capnography is the most reliable way to immediately confirm advanced airway 
placement. Capnography provides an instantaneous measurement of the amount of CO
2
 

SUBJECT:  CAPNOGRAPHY REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
REVISED: 04-01-20 PAGE 2 OF 6 
in the exhaled air and absence of waveform and/or values <10mmHg suggest possible 
advanced airway misplacement. However, patients in cardiac arrest or profound shock 
may also have end-tidal CO
2
 values <10 despite proper airway placement. 
 
8.   Capnography provides the most reliable way to continuously monitor advanced airway 
position. The waveform provides a continuous assessment of ventilation over time. A 
normal waveform which becomes suddenly absent suggests dislodgement and requires 
clinical confirmation. 
 
9.   The value of exhaled CO
2
 is affected by ventilation (effectiveness of CO
2
 elimination), 
perfusion (transportation of CO
2
 in the body) and metabolism (production of CO
2
 via 
cellular metabolism). In addition to the end-tidal CO
2
 value, the ventilation rate as well as 
the size and shape of the capnograph must be used to interpret the results. 
 
10. Decreased perfusion will reduce the blood flow to the tissues, decreasing offload of CO
2
 
from the lungs. Therefore, patients in shock and patients in cardiac arrest will generally 
have reduced end-tidal CO
2
 values.   
 
11. A sudden increase in perfusion will cause a sudden rise in end-tidal CO
2
 values and is a 
reliable indicator of ROSC. It is common to have an elevated ETCO
2
 reading after 
ROSC. Hyperventilation is harmful and should not be done to in attempt to normalize the 
ETCO
2
. 
 
12. Ventilation can have varied effect on CO
2
 measurement. Hyperventilation will reduce 
end-tidal CO
2
 by increasing offload from the lungs. Disorders of ventilation that reduce 
CO
2
 elimination (e.g., COPD), will cause CO
2
 to build up in the body, increasing the 
measured value once ventilation is restored. Generally, hypoventilation will increase 
measured end-tidal CO
2, 
values by decreasing offload from the lungs. However, in 
patients with decreased tidal volumes, hypoventilation can also reduce end-tidal CO
2
, 
because of the relative increase in dead space.  
 
13. End-tidal CO
2
 can be detected using a colorimetric device (ETCO
2
 detector). These 
devices provide limited information about ETCO
2 
as compared to capnography. 
Colorimetric devices do not provide continuous measurement of the value of CO
2
 in the 
exhaled air and cannot be used in ongoing monitoring. Colorimetric devices should only 
be used for confirmation of endotracheal tube placement if capnography is unavailable 
due to equipment failure.   
 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1.   Capnography shall be used for ALL patients receiving positive-pressure ventilation (BMV 
or advanced airway).  Utilize the capnography waveform to assess the patient’s 
ventilation and perfusion status.  Refer to the figures below for examples of typical 
waveform tracings. 
 
2.   Always attach the capnography device to the monitor first and wait for the capnography 
display to appear prior to applying the device to the patient. This zeros the device to 
ensure an accurate reading. 
 
3.   Apply the capnography device immediately upon initiating any positive-pressure 
ventilation, or as soon as feasible. 
 

SUBJECT:  CAPNOGRAPHY REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
REVISED: 04-01-20 PAGE 3 OF 6 
4.   During bag-mask-ventilation, maintain a continuous seal in order to obtain accurate 
capnography readings. 
 
5.   When an advanced airway is placed, the capnography device shall be applied/re-applied 
immediately to confirm airway placement, along with assessing bilateral breath sounds 
and absence of gastric sounds.   
 
6.   Visualization of a normally shaped waveform with a normal or elevated value confirms 
placement.  Extremely low values (<10 mmHg) without the typical waveform implies 
esophageal placement and the endotracheal tube should be removed. For patients in 
shock or cardiac arrest, the value (and height of the waveform) will likely be reduced but 
the shape of the waveform should be normal.   
 
7.   Continuously monitor the waveform, report the capnography reading to the base hospital 
and document capnography reading on the patient care record as follows: 
 
a.   Immediately after placement of an advanced airway  
b.   With any change in patient condition 
c.   After any patient movement 
d.   Every five minutes during transport 
e.   Upon transfer of care 
 
8.   For patients in cardiac arrest, continuously monitor capnography during resuscitation.  A 
sudden rise in ETCO
2
, along with an organized rhythm, is a reliable sign of ROSC and 
should prompt a pulse check.  Do not hyperventilate regardless of the ETCO
2
 value; 
elevated values will normalize with proper ventilation.  A drop in ETCO
2
 below normal 
can signify progressive hypotension or re-arrest.   
 
9.   Consider use of capnography via nasal cannula, if available, in spontaneously ventilating 
patients who are: 
 
a.   Sedated due to illicit substance ingestion  
b.   Treated with medications with sedative properties (e.g., midazolam or opioids)   
c.   In severe respiratory distress 
 
10. In spontaneously breathing patients, monitor for significant hypoventilation or apnea as 
an indication to begin assisted ventilation.  A “shark-fin” waveform on EtCO
2
 monitoring 
indicates bronchospasm; treatment with albuterol is indicated.  
 
 
11. 
During positive-pressure ventilation, if a “shark-fin” pattern and/or an elevating EtCO
2
 
waveform (“breath stacking”) is visualized, decrease ventilation rate to avoid increases in 
intrathoracic pressure which can lead to decrease in venous blood return to the heart 
and cardiopulmonary arrest.
 
 
 
  

SUBJECT:  CAPNOGRAPHY REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
REVISED: 04-01-20 PAGE 4 OF 6 
Capnography Waveforms 
Normal shape of the capnograph (Normal waveform is depicted below)
 
Esophageal Intubation (Low values <10 and irregular waveform or flat line) 
 
 
Obstructed or Dislodged Endotracheal Tube (Sudden loss of normal waveform followed by 
low irregular waveform or flat line) 
 
 
Hyperventilation (Normal waveform with reduced height, <35mmHg, and high ventilation rate) 
 
 
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time

SUBJECT:  CAPNOGRAPHY REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
REVISED: 04-01-20 PAGE 5 OF 6 
Hypoventilation / Bradypnea (Normal waveform with increased height, >45mmHg) 
 
Hypoventilation / Low tidal volumes (Normal waveform with reduced height, <35mmHg, and 
slow ventilation rate; A similar reduced height waveform can also be seen with shock – see 
progressive hypotension below). 
 
Air Trapping / Breath Stacking (Box wave forms that show increasing values with each 
successive breath) 
 
Bronchospasm (“Shark Fin Pattern”) 
 
 
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time

SUBJECT:  CAPNOGRAPHY REFERENCE NO. 1305 
 
REVISED: 04-01-20 PAGE 6 OF 6 
Return of Spontaneous Circulation (Sudden increase in values in a patient in cardiac arrest) 
 
 
Progressive Hypotension or Re-arrest (Progressive decrease in values with each successive 
breath) 
 
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
10
20
40
30
0
50
EtCO
2
mmHg
Time
