# 1074969 1357 PPE

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES REFERENCE NO. 1357 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 06-29-20 PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 10-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 06-29-20 
Medical Control Guideline:  PROTECTION AGAINST POTENTIAL 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
 
PURPOSE: To describe processes for protection against communicable diseases including, 
personal protective equipment (PPE), isolation of the ambulance patient 
compartment, and decontamination of the ambulance post call. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Airborne Transmission: Transmission of a communicable disease via residue from 
evaporated droplets or dust particles containing microorganisms which remain suspended in the 
air. 
 
Communicable Disease: A disease that is transmitted from human to human. 
 
Contact Transmission: Transmission of a communicable disease via direct contact of the 
infected person or via an object or material that can carry infectious particles. 
 
Donning: The process of applying PPE to oneself. 
 
Doffing: The process of removing PPE from oneself. 
 
Droplet Transmission: Transmission of a communicable disease via respiratory droplets that 
are too large to be airborne for long periods of time, and quickly settle out of air. 
 
Emerging Infectious Disease (EID): Infectious diseases that have newly appeared in a 
population or have existed but are rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range, or that 
are caused by one of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Category 
A, B, or C priority pathogens. 
 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Specialized equipment worn to protect oneself from 
communicable diseases. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Exposure to communicable diseases in emergency medical response is a hazard that 
can be mitigated by proper use of PPE, implementation of strategies to isolate or 
increase airflow in the compartment, and decontamination of equipment after each 
patient encounter. 
 
2. Modes of transmission vary by microorganism. Transmission may occur via contact, 
respiratory droplets, and/or airborne particles. 
 
a. Standard (i.e., unknown transmission or no known communicable disease) 
b. Contact (i.e., infected areas of the person’s body such as skin infections, diarrhea) 
c. Droplet (i.e., COVID-19, influenza, meningitis, bronchiolitis, other respiratory viruses) 
d. Airborne (i.e., measles, varicella (chicken pox), disseminated herpes zoster, or 
tuberculosis) 
 
3. Standard precautions, formerly known as universal precautions, are the minimum PPE 
worn for every patient encounter. 

SUBJECT: PROTECTION AGAINST POTENTIAL REFERENCE NO. 1357 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE 
 
REVISED: 10-01-23 PAGE 2 OF 4
  
 
4. The appropriate strategies, including the use of PPE beyond standard precautions, are 
selected by anticipating which communicable disease may be present on scene and the 
route by which that communicable disease is transmitted. 
 
5. During periods of respiratory illness or emerging infectious disease surge, it is prudent to 
apply the highest level of PPE and mitigation strategies until additional information is 
known about the transmission route and communicability of the disease. 
 
6. Donning appropriate PPE is an essential part of provider safety and takes precedence 
over expediting patient care.  
 
7. Donning and doffing should be performed in the presence of a partner to ensure proper 
technique. 
 
GUIDELINES:  
 
1. Perform hand hygiene prior to donning PPE. 
 
2. Don PPE in the following sequence from first on to last on: gown, mask or respirator, eye 
protection, gloves. If two-glove technique used don first pair of gloves first and second 
pair of gloves last. 
 
3. Don the appropriate PPE and take the following precautions during care of a patient with 
a confirmed or suspected communicable disease, see Table 1.  
 
4. For all precautions, limit the number of providers in the patient compartment to only 
essential personnel to minimize exposures. 
 
5. Maintain PPE throughout the patient encounter. Doff PPE once the patient encounter is 
complete. 
 
6. Doff PPE in the following sequence from first off to last off: gown, gloves, goggles or 
face shield, mask or respirator. If two-glove technique used doff first pair of gloves first 
and second pair of gloves last. 
 
a. Contaminated surfaces of the PPE are the outer glove surface, front portion of 
the gown/raincoat, front portion of the eye protection, and front portion of the 
mask and any other surfaces that knowingly came into contact with the patient or 
were otherwise contaminated. Clean surfaces of the PPE include the rear portion 
of the gown/raincoat, eye protection straps, and mask straps. 
 
b. PPE should be doffed by clean hands coming into contact with clean portions of 
the PPE only. 
 
7. Dispose of doffed PPE in a biohazard container. 
 
8. Perform proper hand hygiene. 
 
9. Refer to the CDC for on additional guidance on donning and doffing PPE: 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/using-ppe.html 
 

SUBJECT: PROTECTION AGAINST POTENTIAL REFERENCE NO. 1357 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE 
 
REVISED: 10-01-23 PAGE 3 OF 4
  
10. After each patient encounter decontaminate all surfaces of durable medical equipment 
using Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved disinfectant and dispose of all 
disposable medical equipment that came in contact with the patient or the scene per 
provider agencies protocols. If a raincoat is used as a gown, wipe down with EPA 
approved disinfectant and hang up to air dry. 
 
 

SUBJECT: PROTECTION AGAINST POTENTIAL REFERENCE NO. 1357 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE 
 
REVISED: 10-01-23 PAGE 4 OF 4 
Table 1. PPE and Mitigation Strategies for Communicable Disease Precautions 
 
Type of Transmission Minimum PPE Required Mitigation Strategies 
Standard Gloves 
• Perform hand hygiene 
• Clean and disinfect surfaces  
Contact 
Gloves, gowns (as 
available) 
Droplet 
Gloves, surgical mask, eye 
protection, gowns (as 
available) 
• Perform hand hygiene 
• Clean and disinfect surfaces  
• Place surgical mask on patient 
(and caregiver) 
• Use viral filters during positive 
pressure ventilation 
• Ask ambulatory patients to move 
outside of residence 
• Open windows of transport 
vehicle, weather permitting 
• Adjust the transport vehicle’s 
ventilation system to the highest 
air changes per hour 
Airborne 
Gloves, respirator (N95, 
P100, or PAPR), eye 
protection, gowns
