# 1078887 528.1SoberingCenterMedicalClearanceScreeningTool

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (PARAMEDIC) 
SUBJECT: MEDICAL CLEARANCE CRITERIA SCREENING REFERENCE NO. 528.1 
 TOOL FOR SOBERING CENTER (SC) 
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-01-20 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Paramedic shall assess and evaluate the patient using all the criteria listed below. 
2. If ALL criteria are Yes (Green) – triage patient to designated Sobering Center (SC), only 
if transport time is within 15 minutes. 
3. If ANY criterion is No (Red) – triage patient to the most accessible 9-1-1 receiving 
hospital. 
4. MEDICAL CLEARANCE CRITERIA FOR SC 
 
Provider Impression of Alcohol Intoxication Yes  No  
Verbalizes consent Yes  No  
Cooperative and does not require restraints Yes  No  
Ambulatory, does not require wheelchair and no focal neurological deficit Yes  No  
No emergent medical condition Yes  No  
Age ≥ 18 years old and < 65 years Yes  No  
Heart Rate ≥60 and <120 beats per minute Yes  No  
Respiratory Rate ≥12 and <24 respirations per minute Yes  No  
Pulse Oximetry ≥94% on room air Yes  No  
SBP ≥100 and <180 mmHg  Yes  No  
Best Glasgow Coma Score ≥14* Yes  No  
If diabetes, glucose ≥60 and <250mg/dL Yes  No  
No injury meeting TC criteria or guidelines Yes  No  
No complaint of: chest pain, SOB, Abdominal or pelvic pain, or syncope Yes  No  
No bleeding including any hemoptysis or GI bleed Yes  No   
Not on anticoagulants** Yes  No  
No suicidal ideations Yes  No  
Not pregnant (known or suspected) Yes  No  
No bruising or hematoma above the clavicles Yes  No  
No intellectual or developmental disability Yes  No  
No loss of consciousness within 24 hours (syncopal or seizure} Yes  No  
EMS Personnel feel patient is stable for SC Yes  No  
 
* Best GCS – upon initial assessment, an inebriated person may not have spontaneous eye opening without 
stimulation and may not be fully oriented which = GCS of 13. Upon secondary assessment, if eyes remain open with 
minimal confusion, GCS is 14 and meets criteria.  
 
** Common Anticoagulants: Warfarin/Coumadin, Clopidogrel/Plavix. Enoxaprin/Lovenox, Rivaroxaban/Xarelto, 
Dagigatran/Pradaxa, Apixaban/Eliquis, Edoxaban/Savaysa, and Fondaparinux/Arixta.
