# 1111067 503.2 DiversionRequestQuickReferenceGuide

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REFERENCE NO. 503.2 
  QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 2 
TYPE OF DIVERSION REQUEST VIA / DURATION RATIONALE 
ED Saturation – ED ALS Request via ReddiNet. 
Diversion will be for 2 hours. 
ReddiNet will automatically 
re-open hospital at the end of 
2 hours 
All ED treatment bays are full 
and 30% or greater of ED has 
patients are either in 
Resuscitative or 
Immediate/Emergent 
conditions. 
ED Saturation – ED BLS Request via telephone to the  
Medical Alert Center. 
Diversion will be up to 4 
hours. ReddiNet will 
automatically re-open 
hospital at the end of 4 hours. 
Implemented on a case-by-
case basis during periods of 
extreme surge of patients (i.e., 
disease outbreak/ 
epidemic/pandemic).  
Hospital must have at least 3 
ambulance patients (ALS/BLS) 
waiting for over 60 minutes to 
transfer patient to hospital 
equipment. 
ED Saturation – Provider ED 
ALS 
EMS Provider must contact 
the Medical Alert Center. 
Diversion will be for 2 hours. 
ReddiNet will automatically 
re-open hospital at the end of 
2 hours. 
Hospital must have at least 3 
ambulance patients (ALS/BLS) 
waiting for over 30 minutes to 
transfer patient to hospital 
equipment. 
Computerized Tomography 
(CT) Scanner 
Request via ReddiNet, 
duration will be based on the 
resolution of inability to 
perform CT scans. 
Unable to provide essential 
diagnostic procedures due to 
lack of a functioning CT 
scanner. 
Trauma Request via ReddiNet, 
duration will be based on the 
resolution of the rational for 
diversion. 
Unavailable Critical Equipment 
or Operating Room, or Trauma 
Team Encumbered 
Pediatric Medical Center 
(PMC) 
Request via ReddiNet, 
duration will be based on the 
resolution of the rational for 
diversion. 
Unavailable critical equipment 
that is essential to definitive 
diagnosis or treatment of 
medical pediatric patients. 
Lack of available PICU beds 
alone is not sufficient cause to 
request PMC Diversion. 
ST-Elevation Myocardial 
Infarction (STEMI) Receiving 
Center (SRC) 
Request via ReddiNet, 
Diversion will be for 3 hours.  
ReddiNet will automatically 
re-open hospital at the end of 
3 hours 
Cardiac Catheterization 
laboratories (cath labs) are 
fully encumbered caring for 
STEMI patient or mechanical 
failure of critical cath lab 
equipment. 
Hospital must notify the EMS Agency SRC System Program 
Manager for mechanical failure/equipment issue that is 
expected to exceed 24 hours. 

SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REFERENCE NO. 503.2 
  QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
TYPE OF DIVERSION REQUEST VIA / DURATION RATIONALE 
Primary Stroke Center (PSC) Requested via ReddiNet, 
Diversion will be for 2 hours. 
Reddinet will automatically 
re-open hospital at the end of 
2 hours.  
Unable to perform diagnostic 
brain imaging (CT scan or 
MRI). 
Comprehensive Stroke 
Center (CSC) 
Requested via ReddiNet, 
Diversion will be for 2 hours. 
Reddinet will automatically 
re-open at the end of 2 hours.  
Unavailable Critical Equipment 
or Interventional Radiological 
(IR) Room, or Stroke Team 
Encumbered 
Extracorporeal 
Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation (ECPR)_ 
Request via ReddiNet, 
duration will be based on the 
resolution of the rational for 
diversion. 
Unavailable critical equipment 
or qualified personnel to 
perform ECPR. ECPR 
diversion does not divert 
patients in cardiac arrest. 
Internal Disaster Hospital must notify the 
Medical Alert Center via 
telephone, duration will be 
based on resolution of the 
rational for internal disaster. 
Power Outage 
Critical infrastructure or system 
failure impacting patient care 
Fire 
Bomb threat/explosion 
Flooding 
Water disruption/contamination 
HAZMAT in patient care areas 
Internal Disaster does not 
apply to work actions.
