# 1112993 834.1 AMAQuickReferenceGuide

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
                 
SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834.1 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE  
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-01-21  PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED:  07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES:  01-01-22 
 
STEP 1 - Does the patient have Decision-Making Capacity? 
The patient understands and can verbalize the risks/consequences of not receiving treatment / transport 
ideally in their own words – as EMS has described and EMS believes the patient has decision-making capacity 
Yes 
Uncertain – unable to access/engage 
patient to complete assessment 
Treat / Transport 
 
Is there an Authorized Health Care 
Provider (HCP) on scene? 
Yes 
No 
STEP 2 - Does the patient have an 
emergency medical condition? 
• Abnormal vital signs (except isolated asymptomatic HTN) 
• Meets Base Contact Requirements (Ref. 1200.2) 
• In the PM/EMT judgment, patient has an immediate need 
for medical attention 
No Yes 
Meets “Treatment in Place”  
 
• Patient may be treated in place or 
medically cleared by authorized 
HCP 
• AMA required if patient meets Base 
Contact Requirements 
STEP 3 - Does the patient have a High-Risk Chief 
Complaint / Features OR Social Risk Factors? 
No 
Yes 
High-Risk Chief Complaints: Chest Pain, Abdominal Pain, GI 
Bleeding, Pregnancy, Syncope Neurologic symptoms (including 
dizziness/vertigo, weakness, visual changes), and ALOC 
High-Risk Features: 
• Age <12 months or >70 years old 
• Patient with complicating co-morbidities: active cardiac, 
respiratory, liver or kidney disease, cancer, neurologic 
disease, or immunocompromised 
Social Risk Factors: Homelessness, Congregate Living, 
Skilled Nursing Facility, Long Term Care Facility 
Assess, Treat 
& Release 
Against Medical Advice (AMA) 
 
Does the patient meet Base Contact 
Requirement or is EMS concerned? 
No 
Yes 
Base Contact 
not required 
Base Contact 
required for 
AMA 
Make every attempt to 
contact Base before patient 
leaves the scene. 
Base may want to speak 
with the patient 
If EMS has assessed a patient who DOES NOT want transport to the hospital,  
this guide may be used to assist in determining the need for AMA; Assess, Treat and Release; or Treatment in Place 
Can EMS safely 
transport the 
patient? 
Has EMS engaged all appropriate 
resources (e.g., Law Enforcement, 
Base Contact)? 
Release Following Protocol Guidelines 
(if all appropriate resources engaged) 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No
