# 1129222 1307.2 VerbalDe Escalation

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: VERBAL DE-ESCALATION (ERASER MNEMONIC) Ref. No. 1307.2 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 1 
E Eyeball the 
patient 
Evaluate the patient from a safe distance.  Survey the scene and ask about 
weapons or other features that make the scene unsafe.  Decide if Law 
Enforcement (LE) is necessary (if in doubt err on the side of caution).  Are 
there signs that the patient will not respond to verbal de-escalation?  
R Respect the 
Patient’s Space   
Patients may escalate when there is intrusion into the personal space.  
EMS personnel should maintain a respectful distance while being aware of 
escape routes should the patient become violent.  
A A single member 
of EMS personnel 
does the talking 
and builds 
rapport 
Establishing rapport is critical.  With multiple EMS personnel on the scene, 
a single individual should be charged with talking to the patient.  The EMS 
personnel charged with this task must remain neutral, and not become 
“emotionally involved” in the patient (such as becoming angry, irritated, or 
frightened of the patient).   
• State your name and position, offer your help.   
• Be genuine and honest.   
• Use a calm, reassuring, and helpful voice, and a neutral expression.  
Be concise in your questions, statements, or instructions.  
• Give the patient time to respond. 
S Sensible 
Listening 
 
Often patients want to be heard, and people who are upset or confused 
generally want a way to resolve the issue. Help them find a “way out” if it is 
reasonable.  Try to understand what the patient wants.  Show a willingness 
to calmly listen to the patient, without necessarily reacting to demands.   
This step can result in re-escalation of agitation if  EMS personnel becomes 
emotionally reactive, angry, frightened, or frustrated.  Other EMS personnel 
may need to step in and continue if this happens. 
E Establish 
expectations and 
set boundaries 
 
Boundaries should be set with the patient about behavior that will not be 
tolerated, consequences of actions, and what the patient is likely to expect.  
It is important to be clear but avoid using language that can sound 
intimidating or threatening. 
• For example, “You may not threaten people, it is our job to make 
sure everyone stays safe.”  “We need to make sure that you are ok, 
can we check your vitals and ask you some questions.”  
“Unfortunately, we are worried that you cannot make informed 
medical decisions because you are intoxicated.  We are going to 
take you to the hospital so you can be treated for your injuries.”   
• Give specific instructions such as “can you please sit down so we 
can talk”, “can you put down your bag”.   Avoid generic directives 
like “calm down” or “relax”.   
• Provide a clear warning to the patient about the need to ensure the 
safety of both the patient and EMS personnel and public.  Warn that 
restraint, or medications will be given as necessary, but as a last 
resort.   
R Reasonable 
choices are given 
to the patient 
By retaining some degree of control, many patients will comply with 
direction if given reasonable choices.  For example, EMS personnel could 
say, “would you like to walk over to the ambulance and sit on the bed 
inside, or do you prefer we bring the bed over here for you to sit on?”
