# 1129225 1317.32 Olanzapine

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – OLANZAPINE Ref. No. 1317.32 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
Classification 
Atypical anti-psychotic 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Agitation in a cooperative patient (able to self-administer medication) 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
None 
 
Adult Dose 
10 mg ODT given ONCE 
 
Pediatric Dose 
10mg ODT given ONCE for pediatric patients longer than the length-based resuscitation tape 
 
Mechanism of Action 
2
nd
 generation anti-psychotic. Antagonizes serotonin 5-HT, dopamine, histamine and alpha-1 receptors.  The 
precise mechanism is unknown but thought to be mediated through serotonin 5-HT and dopamine receptor 
sites. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is 10-15 min; duration is hours 
 
Contraindications 
Pregnancy 
Dementia related psychosis 
Patients ≤14 years AND on the length-based resuscitation tape 
Ondansetron co-administration (QT prolongation) 
 
Interactions 
CNS Depressant (enhances sedative effect) 
Blood pressure lowering agents (enhances hypotensive effect) 
QT prolonging drugs (additive prolongation of QT may produce torsade de pointes/polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia) 
 
Adverse Effects 
Dry mouth 
Dystonic reaction 
Drowsiness 
GI upset 
Headache  
Orthostatic hypotension 
Sedation 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
•  Caution use in patients >70 years of age. 
• May cause prolonged QT interval. Caution in patients with known prolonged QT syndrome 
or    recent/simultaneous use of other QT-prolonging drugs. 
• Should not be administered in patients known to be pregnant, regardless of gestational age. 
• Patients with known schizophrenia or bipolar disorder that are symptomatic (i.e., hearing 
voices, paranoid thoughts) may benefit most for symptom management. May be 
administered safely for undifferentiated agitation. 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – OLANZAPINE Ref. No. 1317.32 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
• Monitor airway and sedation if concomitant CNS depressant use is suspected as 
depressant effects may be enhanced. 
• Look Alike; Sound Alike mediations are defined as those medications when written or 
verbally pronounced have the potential to lead to a medication error by mimicking the 
appearance or sound of another medication. The drug names Olanzapine and Ondansetron 
are similar enough to cause confusion. A second check of drug names should be performed 
before administration.
