# 1163127 1307.4EMSandLawEnforcementCo Response2024 07 01

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
 
Medical Control Guideline: EMS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT CO-RESPONSE             Ref. No. 1307.4 
 
DEFINITION 
 
Agitation: A hyper-aroused state (ranging in severity from anxious and cooperative to violent 
and combative) in which the individual exhibits excessive, repeated, and purposeless motor or 
verbal behaviors (e.g., pacing, fidgeting, clenching fists or teeth, prolonged staring, picking at 
clothing or skin, responding to internal stimuli such as hallucinations, threatening or carrying out 
violent acts).  
 
Decision-Making Capacity: The ability to understand the nature and consequences of 
proposed health care. This includes understanding the significant risks and benefits and having 
the ability to make and communicate a decision regarding the proposed health care in the 
patient’s primary language, if feasible. A person has decision-making capacity if they are able 
to:  
• Communicate the need for treatment, the implications of receiving and of not receiving 
treatment, and alternative forms of treatment that are available, and  
• Relate the above information to their personal values, and then make and convey a 
decision.  
 
The lack of decision-making capacity may be:  
• Temporarily lost (e.g., due to unconsciousness, influence of mind-altering substances, 
mental illness, or cognitive impairment)  
• Permanently lost (e.g., due to irreversible coma, persistent vegetative state, untreatable 
brain injury, or dementia) 
• Never existed (i.e., due to profound neurodevelopmental disorder, those who are 
deemed by the Court as incompetent or a person under conservatorship) 
 
Minor: A person less than eighteen years of age. 
 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. EMS and Law Enforcement often co-respond to the scene when there is an agitated 
patient perceived to pose risk to themself and/or others. 
 
2. EMS focus is on the duty to the patient, whereas Law Enforcement has a duty to the 
public. This may result in differences in the approach to scene management. 
 
3. Each situation is unique and dynamic such that no guideline can be comprehensive 
or specific. The flow diagram below represents a general approach, but must be 
adapted to the individual circumstances of the response. 
 
4. Early, clear and open communication will facilitate arriving at the best possible 
outcome for the person. The conflict resolution pathway (Guideline #4) should be 
employed whenever there is not full agreement between EMS and Law Enforcement 
on whether to remain engaged. 
 
5. The decision for Law Enforcement to engage, and/or to apply a 5150 or 5585, will be 
according to their policies, procedures, and the law. While Law Enforcement will 

SUBJECT:  EMS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT CO-RESPONSE REFERENCE NO. 1307.4 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 3
  
ultimately determine if there is an immediate threat, engagement should be a 
consensus-driven decision based on the assessment of EMS and Law Enforcement 
on scene. For cases where there is ongoing disagreement and a successful 
resolution cannot be reached on scene, an after action review shall be undertaken at 
a later agreed upon date, in collaboration with both agencies. 
 
 
GUIDELINES: 
 
1. Refer to the flow diagram below for guidance. 
 
2. When the agitated person is a minor, apply the guidelines with the following caveats: 
 
a. If the minor is alone, the general approach will be to engage. 
b. If the minor is in the care of a parent or legal guardian, the principles of 
capacity assessment are applied to that parent or legal guardian, with 
consideration for how they can assist in de-escalating the situation and 
provide an alternative to engagement. 
c. Involve the Department of Child and Family Services as appropriate, 
https://dcfs.lacounty.gov/, 800-540-4000. 
d. Refer also to Ref. No. 832, Treatment/Transport of Minors. 
 
3. Consider the following Mental Health Resources: 
 
a. Request response of local jurisdictional resources as available.  
b. Request a Crisis Response Team from the Department of Mental Health 
Access Center 24/7 Contact Line: 800-854-7771. 
c. For any patient left on scene, inform the patient of the ‘988’ hotline, which 
provides telemedicine mental health resources.  
 
4. For situations where Law Enforcement decision is to disengage or defer and EMS 
remains concerned about immediate risk to the patient and/or others, the following 
communication strategy should be employed in a stepwise fashion until a final 
solution is agreed upon: 
 
a. The highest ranking EMS and Law Enforcement personnel on scene discuss 
their rationale for the decision to engage versus disengage. 
b. Mental health resources are identified and requested to the scene to provide 
alternative methods for de-escalation and management. Consider contacting 
the Base Hospital for further guidance on resources and strategies. 
c. If not already on scene, the EMS and Law Enforcement supervisors are 
requested to the scene and discuss face-to-face. 
d. The EMS supervisor speaks with the Law Enforcement Watch Commander. 
e. If no resolution is achieved, EMS shall defer to Law Enforcement and not 
engage on their own if there is a perceived risk to EMS personnel and/or the 
patient.  
 
5. Document decision-making and involved personnel on the ePCR including: 
a. All responding agencies on scene  
b. EMS assessment 
c. Name and assignment of the highest ranking Law Enforcement Officer 
involved in the decision-making 

SUBJECT:  EMS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT CO-RESPONSE REFERENCE NO. 1307.4 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 3
  
d. Reasons for Law Enforcement decision for disengagement when applicable 
e. Any follow up plans and resources requested and/or provided to the patient 
for non-transport decisions 
f. For non-transports, document the appropriate disposition per Ref 834, Patient 
Refusal of Treatment/Transport and Release at Scene
