# 1179056 622

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMS DATA REFERENCE NO. 622 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12-03-07       PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the appropriate process for obtaining Emergency Medical Services 
(EMS) Agency data. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act 
 Healthcare Information Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)  
 Title 45, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 164.154 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Covered Entities: Healthcare providers, health plans, and healthcare clearing houses that 
electronically transmit health information. 
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA): A federal law passed in 1996, 
which established a set of national standards for the electronic transmission of health 
information, including research subjects. Covered entities are required to comply with HIPAA 
regulations. 
 
Institutional Review Board (IRB): An Institutional Review Board, also known as an 
independent ethics committee, ethical review board, or research ethics board, is a type of 
committee used in medical research that has been formally designated to approve, monitor, and 
review biomedical and behavioral research involving humans. IRBs often conduct some form of 
risk-benefit analysis in an attempt to determine whether or not research should be done. The 
purpose of the IRB is to assure that the appropriate steps are taken to protect the rights and 
welfare of humans participating as subjects in a research study. 
 
Limited Data Set Information: Information that does not include standard identifiers so as to 
ensure that remaining health information is not identifiable to an individual or incident. Individual 
or incident identifiers include but are not limited to the following: 
 
• Names 
• Postal Address, information other than town or city, state, and zip code 
• Dates including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death, and all ages 
over 89 
• Telephone and fax numbers 
• Electronic mail addresses 
• Social Security numbers 
• Medical records numbers 
• Hospital visit numbers 
• Health plan beneficiary numbers 
• Account numbers 
• Certification/license numbers 
• Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers 
• Device identifiers and serial numbers 

SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMS DATA REFERENCE NO. 622 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
• Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) 
• Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers 
• Biometric identifiers, including finger or voice prints 
• Full face photographic images and any comparable images 
• Any other unique identifying number, characteristic or code 
 
Protected Health Information (PHI): Individually identifiable health information that is held or 
transmitted in any form or media, whether electronic, written, spoken, printed, digital, recorded, 
or photographic, which can be linked to an individual, or there is reasonable basis to believe it 
can be used to identify an individual. 
 
Research Review Committee: Committee comprised of senior EMS Agency leadership 
including the Director of the Data Division, EMS Agency Medical Directors, and Nursing Director 
of EMS Programs which reviews the submitted requests for completeness and feasibility in 
order to ensure that the available data are sufficient and appropriate to answer the proposed 
research question(s). 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. EMS data contains patient information which is protected under HIPAA. Without specific 
authorization, the EMS Agency will only release Limited Data Set Information. 
 
2. Local EMS stakeholders and healthcare researchers are encouraged to utilize EMS data 
to evaluate patient care and outcomes and to answer other healthcare related questions 
that may lead to system improvements. Research studies will require approval prior to 
data release from the appropriate IRBs. 
 
3. All release of data will be approved by the Director of the EMS Agency (or designee). 
When applicable, the EMS Agency will seek the recommendation of the appropriate 
EMS Agency Advisory Committee. 
 
4. Neither provider (i.e., hospital or prehospital care provider) nor the EMS Agency shall 
release another entity’s identifiable information to any entity for public use without first 
receiving written permission from the entity’s Executive Officer, except as permitted by 
required statute, regulation, or court order. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Requests for EMS Data: 
 
A. Information that does not disclose the identity of the provider 
 
1. Requesting party shall submit a written request utilizing Ref. No. 622.1, 
Data Request and Levels of Support, to the EMS Agency’s Data System 
Management Division Chief (or designee). Augmentation to an original 
request may be considered a new data request. 
 
2. The EMS Agency will: 
 
a. Review the request, including evaluation of the request by the 
Research Review Committee, and inform the requesting party of 

SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMS DATA REFERENCE NO. 622 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
the approval/modification request(s)/disapproval decision within 4 
weeks of receiving the request. 
 
b. Advise the requesting party of the anticipated timeframe for 
completion of the data request. 
 
c. Prepare the data in the agreed upon format. If the data format has 
not been specified by the requesting party, an appropriate format 
will be utilized (i.e., graph, tables, etc.). 
 
d. Release the data following receipt of IRB approval, if applicable, 
and approval by the Director of the EMS Agency (or designee). 
 
B. Information that discloses the identity of the provider 
 
1. Requesting party shall: 
 
a. Submit a written request, along with Ref. No. 622.1, Data Request 
and Levels of Support, to the EMS Agency’s Data System 
Management Division Chief (or designee). Augmentation to an 
original request may be considered a new data request. 
 
b. Obtain written permission from the involved agency’s Executive 
Officer authorizing the EMS Agency to release agency-identifiable 
data and provide that written permission to the EMS Agency. 
 
2. The EMS Agency will: 
 
a. Only release data for agencies that have provided written 
authorization permitting release of their data. 
 
b. Provide a copy of the request to the appropriate committee(s) for 
comment and recommendation. 
 
c. Notify the requesting party of the anticipated timeframe in 
determining the approval/disapproval of their request (depending 
on committee meeting schedules, recommendations, etc.). 
 
d. Notify the requesting party of the approval/disapproval of their 
request as soon as responses are received from the involved 
agencies and committees. 
 
e. Advise the requesting party of the anticipated timeframe for 
completion of the request for data. 
 
f. Prepare the data in the agreed upon format. If no data format has 
been specified by the requesting party, an appropriate format will 
be utilized (i.e., graph, tables, etc.). 
 
g. Release the data following receipt of IRB approval, if applicable, 
and approval by the Director of the EMS Agency (or designee). 
 

SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMS DATA REFERENCE NO. 622 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
II. Appeals: 
 
A. Disapproval of data that does not disclose the identity of the provider: 
 
Requesting party shall submit a written request for a review of the decision to the 
Director of the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. 
 
B. Disapproval of data that discloses the identity of the provider: 
 
There is no appeal for data release decisions regarding data that discloses the 
identity of the provider. 
 
III. Fees: 
 
A. The EMS Agency and/or its information technology vendor may charge the 
requesting party a data retrieval fee. 
 
B. Fees will be determined following review of the application form, taking into 
account the complexity of the request, the anticipated time necessary to 
complete the request, and the level (s) of support requested. 
 
C. Fees will be discussed with the requesting party prior to generating the requested 
data. 
 
D. Fees will be collected prior to release of the requested data. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 602,  Confidentiality of Patient Information 
Ref. No. 622.1, Data Request and Levels of Support 
Ref. No. 622.2, Limited Data Set Information 
Ref. No. 622.3, Intended Use of Limited Data Set Information 
Ref. No. 622.4, Data Use Agreement 
Ref. No. 622.5, Confidentiality Agreement
