# 1179877 1240 PHAZMAT

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 5 
 
Contact Medical Alert Center (MAC) for all MCIs prior to transport otherwise notify the receiving 
hospital ❶  
 
1. Secure area, establish incident site, and don protective equipment/gear appropriate for 
hazardous material exposure according to the provider agency protocol 
 
2. If MCI, begin triage (Ref. 519.2 and Ref. 519.5) 
Provide MAC with the following incident information: properties of contaminant, type of 
decontamination performed, signs/symptoms, and smells 
 
3. Remove patient from source if safe to do so, and move to decontamination area prn  
 
4. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
5. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
6. Remove patient’s clothing 
 
7. Flush skin, eyes and mucous membranes with copious amounts of water  
For eye involvement, irrigate with Normal Saline 1L during transport; allow patient to remove 
contact lenses if possible 
 
8. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG prn 
For patients with dysrhythmias, treat in conjunction with TP 1212-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - 
Bradycardia or TP 1213-P, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia 
  
9. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
10. Assess for signs of trauma 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury 
 
11. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 20mL/kg IV rapid infusion per MCG 1309 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207-P, Shock/Hypotension 
 
12. Consider contacting the Poison Control Center in conjunction with the Base Hospital for 
assistance with management of toxins (Ref. 805) 
 
NERVE AGENT EXPOSURE 
 
13. If multiple symptomatic patients with > 50 victims involved, request EMS CHEMPACK from the 
MAC (Ref. 1108) 
 
14. Pediatric patients longer than the length-based resuscitation tape (Broselow™) should be 
treated according to adult doses which are listed below and found in TP 1240, HAZMAT ❷ 
 Mild Exposure:  1 DuoDote IM 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 5 
 Moderate Exposure:  2 DuoDotes IM, one after the other 
 Severe Exposure:  3 DuoDotes IM, one after the other 
 
15. Pediatric patients between 3 – 36 kilograms body weight based on measurement using the 
length-based resuscitation tape (Broselow™) should be treated as follows: ❷ 
 Mild Exposure:  Atropine (0.1mg/mL) 0.02mg/kg IV/IM, dose as per MCG 1309  
 Moderate Exposure:  1 DuoDote IM 
 Severe Exposure:  1 or 2 DuoDote(s) IM, one after the other when applicable, based on the  
table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       *Duodote (2.1mg Atropine/600 mg 2PAM Chloride) 
 
16. For seizure, treat in conjunction with TP 1231-P, Seizure 
 
17. For EMS CHEMPACK Deployment:   
EMS CHEMPACK may be used for repeat dosing as necessary 
 
Avg Wt 
(KG) 
Color Repeat Atropine 
Dose Multi-dose 
vial (0.4mg/mL) 
0.1mg/kg IV or IM 
2PAM Chloride*  
Multi-dose vial  
(50mg/mL) 50 
mg/kg IM or IV 
Diazepam** Multi-dose 
vial (5mg/mL) 0.1 – 
0.2mg/kg IV or IM 
prn seizure 
4 Grey 0.4mg, 1mL 200mg, 4mL 0.5 mg, 0.1mL 
6.5 Pink 0.7mg, 1.75mL 325mg, 6.5mL 1mg,     0.2mL 
8.5 Red 0.9mg, 2.25mL 425mg, 8.5mL 1.5mg,  0.3mL 
10.5 Purple 1mg, 2.5mL 525mg, 10.5mL 2mg,     0.4mL 
13 Yellow 1.3mg, 3.25mL 650mg, 13mL 2.5mg,  0.5mL 
16.5 White 1.6mg, 4mL 825mg, 16.5mL 3mg,     0.6mL 
20.5 Blue 2mg, 5mL 1000mg, 20mL 4mg,     0.8mL 
26 Orange 2.6mg, 6.5mL 1000mg, 20mL 5mg,     1mL 
33 Green 3.3mg, 8.25mL 1000mg, 20mL 6mg,     1.2mL 
Repeat Atropine dose prn 5 minutes after initial emergency DuoDote. Multi-dose vials can 
provide closer to ideal dosages, if available. 
*Repeat Pralidoxime dose 60 minutes after Initial Emergency DuoDote.  
** For seizure, if utilizing the CHEMPACK, prioritize midazolam to treat pediatric seizure per TP-
1231-P, Seizure since the diazepam autoinjector will be too large a dose for pediatric patients.  
 
Avg Wt (KG) Color Initial Emergency Dose 
4 Grey  
6.5 Pink  
8.5 Red 1 DuoDote  
10.5 Purple  
13 Yellow  
16.5 White  
20.5 Blue  
26 Orange 2 DuoDotes  
33 Green  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 5 
If midazolam supply is limited, multi-dose vial diazepam may be available and can be 
administered as per above table. 
Dosing is rounded to the nearest tenth. 
IV preferred route for Diazepam but can administer IM if not IV available  
May repeat diazepam dose x1 in 5 min 
 
If the child is too tall for the pediatric resuscitation tape and adult size, treat per adult protocol    
TP 1240, HAZMAT 
 
ORGANOPHOSPHATE EXPOSURE 
 
18. For heart rate < 60bpm, hypotension, respiratory depression and/or extreme salivation 
Atropine (0.1mg/mL) 0.05mg/kg IV/IO
May be repeated every 5 min, maximum total dose 5mg  
 
For seizure, treat in conjunction with TP 1231-P, Seizure 
 
RADIOLOGIC EXPOSURE 
 
19. If radiation contamination is suspected, confirm by using appropriate detection devices 
available through Department of Public Health (DPH), Radiation Management at (213) 989-
7140 
 
20. If radiation contamination present, identify the cause of the contamination ❸ 
Internal Radiation is exposure through open wound, ingestion or inhalation of radioactive 
materials 
External Radiation is exposure through a Radiological Dispersal Device (RDD), Radiological 
Material Release (RMR) or Radiological Exposure Device (RED) 
 
21. For External Radiation: 
If a RDD is used and in the absence of any other information, evacuate 1,650 feet in all 
directions from the detonation site and then contact the MAC ❸ 
Notify DPH Radiation Management at (213) 989-7140 if departmental HAZMAT team is not 
available and prolonged exposures are expected ❹ 
 
22. For patients with a life-threatening condition: 
Treat using appropriate treatment protocol based on complaints in conjunction with 
decontamination 
Remove the outer clothing and utilize containment mitigation techniques before transport 
 
23. For patients without a life-threatening condition: 
Decontaminate using departmental protocols 
Treat using appropriate treatment protocol based on signs and symptoms 
 
24. Asymptomatic and minimal exposure suspected: 
Decontaminate and release patient if appropriate ❺ 
 
 
CYANIDE EXPOSURE 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 4 OF 5 
 
25. For patients with cardiovascular, neurologic, and/or respiratory compromise due to suspected or 
known cyanide exposure: 
 Hydroxocobalamin 70mg/kg IV/IO, dose per MCG 1309  
 Reconstitute 5 grams in 200mL of Normal Saline (25mg/ml) and infuse over 15 minutes 
May repeat x1 in 15 min 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 5 OF 5 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶    If MCI, MAC should be contacted for 5 or more patients and coordinate all destination decisions 
otherwise the Base Hospital should be notified as specified in this protocol, and if no Base Hospital 
required then the receiving hospital will be notified.  
 
❷    Nerve agent exposure symptom severity: 
 SEVERE: severe respiratory distress, respiratory arrest, cyanosis, extreme SLUDGE (salivation,     
lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastrointestinal distress and emesis) seizures, unconsciousness 
      MODERATE: miosis, rhinorrhea, shortness of breath, vomiting, diarrhea 
 MILD: miosis, rhinorrhea and increased salivation 
       
❸    Radiation Exposure Safety: 
      Exposure to victims with internal radiation poses low-to-no risk to EMS personnel  
      Exposure to victims with external radiation exposure poses low-to-moderate risk to EMS personnel  
      Remember the following principles: 
Time: limit time with the victim to a minimum 
Distance: the further away from the source, the smaller the dose received. 
Shielding: “Turnouts” will protect from alpha and beta emitters, wear respiratory protection if 
particulate matter (i.e., dust or powder) present 
 
❹    The HAZMAT team, MAC, or Department of Public Health Radiation Management will be able to 
redefine boundaries, establish radiation dose guidelines, assist with monitoring and decontamination 
procedures, and provide support to on-scene responders. These resources may also refer to 
Emergency Response Guidebook for other recommended scene precautions. 
 
❺   If number of patients exceeds available resources, asymptomatic patients with minimal exposure may 
be released for home decontamination.
