# 1179051 622.3

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: INTENDED USE OF LIMITED DATA SET INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 622.3 
 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-16 PAGE 1   OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
Data Request Tracking Number (To be completed by the EMS Agency):            
 
 
Data Recipient Name:            
 
 
Check the applicable intended use: 
 
 Non-Research or Quality Improvement (i.e. education or background statistics requiring basic 
count data) 
 Quality Improvement (no intent to publish or disseminate results beyond internal organizational 
use; complete the Data Request Addendum below) 
 Research (complete the Data Request Addendum below) 
 
List i
ntended disclosure of Limited Data Set Information to third parties (e.g., research assistants, 
collaborators): 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
Brief Description of the Project or Study  
 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: INTENDED USE OF LIMITED DATA SET INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 622.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2   OF 3 
 
Data Request Addendum for Quality Improvement Projects and Research Studies  
 
1.   Title: 
 
  
    
2.   Institutional Review Board 
 
a. 
 Approved; number:             
b. 
 Pending Review 
c. 
 Not applicable (QI project) 
 
3.   Team (List
 Primary Investigator, Statistician [if applicable], Co-investigators): 
 
 
 
4.   Describe the potential impact of your project or study results on the LAC EMS system, if 
applicable: 
 
 
 
5.   Objective(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.   Methods 
 
a.   Start Date of   Data Period:  
 
 
b.   End Date of    Data Period:  
 
 
c. Study Population (be as specific as possible; i.e., Patients ≥18 years old with a 
provider impression of traumatic injury [TRMA]):   
 
 
 
d.   Study Exclusion Criteria (i.e. DNR present):  
 
 
 
e.   Outcome Measures (Primary outcome, Secondary Outcomes [if applicable]): 
 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: INTENDED USE OF LIMITED DATA SET INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 622.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3   OF 3 
7.   Please see Limited Data Set Information (Ref. No. 622.2) to identify specific variables for 
this request.  
  
8.   Brief Description of Planned Analyses 
 
a.   Design (i.e.,  retrospective cohort study):  
 
 
 
 
b.   Proposed Analytic Methods: 
 
 
 
 
 
c. Identify potential data elements from the LA County EMS Agency databases that 
wil
l be used to define the key quality measures OR predictors and outcome 
measures: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.   Plans f
or publication and/or dissemination of results: 
 
 
 
10. List Affiliated institution(s):  
 
 
 
11. External funding: 
 
a. 
 No 
 
b. 
 Yes 
i.   If yes, please specify:  
 
 
12. Pr
oposed Tables, Plots, Graphs or other Figures (Optional but encouraged. These may be 
requested by the EMS Agency Research Review Committee during the review process for 
further clarification as needed.)
