# 1179886 1317.20 Glucagon

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – GLUCAGON Ref. No. 1317.20 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25                                      PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Hormone (pancreatic) 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Hypoglycemia: glucose <60mg/dL and venous access cannot be established 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
Clearance of impacted esophageal foreign body (via smooth muscle relaxation) in ED/monitored settings 
Treatment of beta-blocker overdose and/or adjunctive treatment of calcium channel blocker overdose 
 
Adult Dose 
1mg (1mL) IM, may repeat in x1 in 20 min prn 
Pediatric Dose 
< 1 year of age 0.5mL (1mg/mL) IM, may repeat in x1 in 20 min prn 
≥ 1 year of age 1.0mL (1mg/mL) IM, may repeat in x1 in 20 min prn 
 
Mechanism of Action 
A hormone naturally produced by pancreatic alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans. Causes breakdown of 
glycogen (stored in the liver) to glucose and inhibits the synthesis of glycogen from glucose. The combined 
actions increase the blood levels of glucose. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset is 5-20 min; duration is 1-1.5 hr 
 
Contraindications 
In patients with known insulinoma (insulin-secreting tumor), glucagon will produce worsening hypoglycemia 
 
Interactions 
None 
 
Adverse Effects 
Hypotension 
Nausea and vomiting 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• Use mixture immediately after reconstitution of dry powder and provided solution. 
• Patient usually awakens from hypoglycemic coma 5-20 min after glucagon injection. PO carbohydrates 
should be given as soon as possible after patient regains consciousness. 
• Symptoms such as headache, nausea and weakness may persist after recovery from hypoglycemic 
reaction. 
• Glucagon is effective only if there are glycogen stores in the liver. Therefore, it is unlikely to be effective 
in patients with severe malnutrition, adrenal insufficiency or young infants.
