# 1179851 803.1ParamedicFieldReference

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: LOS ANGELES COUNTY  REFERENCE 803.1 
 PARAMEDIC SCOPE OF PRACTICE 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-1993 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 07-01-25  
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-25 
IN ADDITION TO THE FOLLOWING, THE PARAMEDIC SCOPE OF PRACTICE INCLUDES  
REFERENCE NO. 802, LOS ANGELES COUNTY EMT SCOPE OF PRACTICE  
PATIENT ASSESSMENT MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION 
1. Use capnometry and measuring devices to measure 
capnography waveforms 
2. Utilize electrocardiographic devices and monitor 
electrocardiograms (ECG), including 12-lead ECGs 
3. Obtain venous or capillary blood samples 
4. Use electronic devices to measure glucose 
1. Administer approved medications by the following 
routes: 
 a. oral 
 b. intranasal  
 c. sublingual  
 d. transcutaneous 
 e. topical 
 f. inhalation 
2.  g. rectal 
 h. intravenous 
 i. intraosseous 
 j. intramuscular 
 k. subcutaneous 
2. Administer the following medications (using pre-
packaged unit dose products when available): 
 a. 10%, 25%, and 50% dextrose  
 b. adenosine 
 c. aerosolized/nebulized albuterol by handheld 
nebulizer or handheld mask 
 d. amiodarone 
 e. aspirin 
 f. atropine sulfate 
 g. calcium chloride 
 h. diazepam (disaster caches only) 
 i. diphenhydramine hydrochloride 
 j. epinephrine 
 k. fentanyl 
 l. glucagon 
m. hydroxocobalamin 
 n. ketorolac 
 o. lidocaine 
 p. midazolam  
 q. morphine sulfate  
 r. naloxone hydrochloride  
      s.     nitroglycerin tablet or spray  
 t. olanzapine  
 u. ondansetron  
 v. pralidoxime chloride (2-PAMCl) 
w.     sodium bicarbonate  
x.    tranexamic acid (TXA) 
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT &  
OXYGEN ADMINISTRATION 
1. Use a laryngoscope to visualize the airway and 
remove a foreign body with Magill forceps 
2. Insert and perform pulmonary ventilation by use of:  
 a. supraglottic airway (i-gel) in adult and pediatric 
patients 
 b. oral endotracheal intubation in adults and 
pediatric patients over the age of twelve (12) or 
height greater than the length of the pediatric 
resuscitation tape 
 c. stomal intubation 
3. Utilize mechanical ventilation devices for continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP). 
RESCUE & EMERGENCY CARE 
1. Perform needle thoracostomy 
2. Perform defibrillation 
3. Perform synchronized cardioversion 
4. Perform transcutaneous pacing for symptomatic 
bradycardia 
6. Utilize Valsalva maneuver 
7.  Monitor thoracostomy tubes 
8.  Monitor blood product transfusions 
INTRAVENOUS & INTRAOSSEOUS ACCESS 
1. Insert intravenous (IV) catheters, saline locks, or 
needles in peripheral veins 
2. Monitor and administer medications and IV fluids 
through external venous pre-existing vascular access 
devices (PVADs) in the following: 
 a. cardiac arrest 
 b. extremis due to circulatory shock 
 c. base station order 
3. Monitor and administer normal saline solution 
4. Monitor and adjust IV solutions of potassium, 
maximum 40mEq/L 
5. Monitor total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 
PILOT PROGRAM 
Procedures or medications may be implemented on a 
trial basis when approved by the Medical Director of 
the EMS Agency. 
CROSS REFERENCES: 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: LOS ANGELES COUNTY  REFERENCE 803.1 
 PARAMEDIC SCOPE OF PRACTICE 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-1993 PAGE 2 OF 1 
REVISED: 07-01-25  
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-25 
6. Perform adult and pediatric intraosseous insertion per 
Ref. No. 1375 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 802 
Ref. No. 802.1 
Ref. No. 803 
Ref. Series 1200s 
Ref. Series 1300s
