# 1179052 622.4

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
SUBJECT: DATA USE AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.4 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-16 PAGE 1   OF 5 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-24 
D
ata Request Tracking Number (To be completed by the EMS Agency):  ___________________ 
D
ata Recipient (name) :      
This Data Use Agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into as of  (the “Effective Date”) by and 
between 
          (“Data Recipient”) and the Los Angeles
 County Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Agency (“Data Provider”). 
The  f
ederal  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act  and  the  regulations  promulgated  
thereunder (collectively referred to as the “Privacy Rule”) permit the use and disclosure by health 
care  providers  of  certain  information  that  may  include  Protected  Health  Information  (“PHI”)  in  
connection with research activities. 
W
hereas,  Data  Recipient  desires  to  access  from  Data  Provider  certain  limited  de-identified  PHI  
(Limited Data Set) for the purposes of conducting research and/or quality improvement activities in 
a manner that protects the privacy and security of such information. 
W
hereas, Data Recipient and Data Provider are committed to compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Thi
s Agreement is required by the Privacy Rule and sets forth the terms and conditions pursuant to 
which Data Recipient may access this Limited Data Set information (“LDS Information”) from Data 
Provider in accordance with and as allowed by the Privacy Rule. 
1.Definitions 
-  Terms used but not otherwise defined in this Agreement shall have the same
meaning as those terms in the Privacy Rule.
1.
1 “Dir
ect  Identifiers” shall mean those items listed in the 45 C.F.R.  §164.514(b)(2)(i)
that  identify  an  individual  or  relative,  employer,  or  household  member  of  the  
individual,  and  shall  include  names,  telephone  numbers,  fax  numbers,  email  
addresses, social security numbers, medical record numbers, account numbers, full 
face photographs, and other identifying numbers, characteristics or codes. 
1.2 “L
imited Data Set” is a data set of Protected Health Information (“PHI”) that excludes 
the following Direct Identifiers: 
a.Names
b.P
ostal address, information, other than town or city, state, and zip code
c.Dates including birth date, admission date, date of death, and all ages over 89
d.Telephone and fax numbers
e.Electronic mail addresses
f.Social security numbers
g.Medical record numbers
h.Health plan beneficiary numbers
i.Account numbers
j.Certificate/license numbers
k.Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers

SUBJECT: DATA USE AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.4 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2   OF 5 
l. Device identifiers and serial numbers 
m. Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) 
n. Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers 
o. Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints 
p. Full face photographic images and any comparable images 
q. Any other unique identifying number, characteristic or code 
 
1.3 
“Protected  Health  Information” or  “PHI”  means  any  information,  whether  oral  or  
recorded in any form or medium: (i) that relates to the past, present, or future physical 
or mental condition of an individual; the provision of health care to an individual; or 
the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health care to an individual, 
and  (ii)  that  identifies  the  individual  or  with  respect  to  which  there  is  a  reasonable  
basis to believe the information can be used to identify the individual, and shall have 
the meaning given to such term under the Privacy Rule, including, but not limited to 
45 C.F.R. §164.501. 
 
2. U
se of Limited Data Set (LDS) Information 
 
2.1 R
equested LDS Information - Data Recipient requests copies of the LDS 
Information identified in Reference No. 622.2, Limited Data Set Information. 
 
2.2 I
ntended Use of LDS Information - Under the Privacy Rule, the use and disclosure of 
a limited data set in connection with research, public health or health care operations 
is permitted without the patient’s written authorization. The intended use of the LDS 
Information  for  the  research  purposes  shall  be  further  described  in  Reference  No.  
622.3, Intended Use of Limited Data Set Information. 
 
3. R
elease of Information 
 
3.1 P
rocedure -    Data Provider shall either: (a) provide the LDS Information to the Data 
Recipient; or (b) make available the information necessary for the Data Recipient to 
create the requested Limited Data Set. 
 
3.2 C
reation of the LDS - In accordance with the requirements contained in the Privacy 
Rule, the LDS created and/or provided to the Data Recipient under this Agreement 
shall not include any of the Direct Identifiers identified in Section 1.2 above.  
 
(a) B
y  Data  Provider  - Data  Provider  will  create  the  LDS  containing  the  
information  identified  in  Reference  No.  622.2   when  the  data  is  available  in  
abstracted format from currently existing Data Provider databases. 
 
(b) B
y Data Recipient -   If the data is not available in an electronic format, the Data 
Recipient may create the LDS from a manual abstraction process from paper 
records.  Data  Recipient  acknowledges  and  agrees  that  neither  the  Data  
Recipient nor any person assisting Data Recipient in the abstraction process 
shall  be  provided  access  to  PHI  unless  they  have  completed  all  applicable  
HIPAA training. 
 
4. R
esponsibilities of Data Recipient 
 
4.1 S
afeguards  - Data  Recipient  shall  use  appropriate  administrative,  technical  and  
physical safeguards to prevent any use or disclosure of the Information other than as 
provided for by the Agreement. Data Recipient shall comply with HIPAA regulations 

SUBJECT: DATA USE AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.4 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3   OF 5 
and must obtain Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval to publish. The intent to 
publish must be clearly stated in the Reference No. 622.3. 
  
4.2 N
o Further Use -   Data Recipient is not authorized and shall not use or further disclose 
the information other than as permitted under the Agreement or as required by law or 
regulation. 
 
4.3 P
ermitted  Uses  and  Disclosures  - Data  Recipient  may  use  the  LDS  Information  
received  from  Data  Provider  pursuant  to  the  Agreement  solely  for  the  purpose  
identified  on  Reference  No.  622.3.  Data  Recipient  will  not  use  or  disclose  the  
Information other than as permitted by this Agreement or as required by law. 
 
4.4 R
eporting of Disclosures -   Data Recipient shall notify Data Provider in writing within 
five (5) working days of its discovery of any use or disclosure of the LDS information 
not  permitted  by  the  Agreement  of  which  Data  Recipient,  its  employees  or  agents  
become aware. Data Recipient further agrees to mitigate, to the extent feasible and 
allowable  by  law,  any  harmful  effect  that  is  known  or  becomes  known  to  Data  
Recipient  that  arises  from  a  use  or  disclosure  of  the  LDS  by  Data  Recipient  or  its  
agents in violation of this Agreement or the Privacy Rule. 
 
4.5 Re-di
sclosure of Limited Data Set -    Data Recipient shall ensure that any person or 
entity to whom it provides the LDS information, which may include but is not limited 
to,  research  assistants,  shall  agree  with  the  Data  Recipient  in  writing,  by  signing  a 
confidentiality agreement  attached  hereto  as  Reference  No.  622.5,  Confidentiality  
Agreement or Data Recipient shall obtain and maintain a written agreement with each 
agent  or  subcontractor  that  has  or  will  have  access  to  the  LDS  through  Data  
Recipient, pursuant to each agent or subcontractor shall agree to be bound by the 
same  restrictions,  terms  and  conditions  that  apply  to  the  Data  Recipient  under  this  
Agreement with respect to the LDS. 
 
4.6 N
otice of Request for Data - Data Recipient agrees to notify Data Provider promptly 
upon receipt of any request for production or subpoena of the LDS, in connection with 
any governmental investigation or governmental or civil proceeding. 
 
4.7 N
o  Identification  or  Contact  - Data  Recipient  agrees  that  it  shall  not  use  the  LDS  
information  in  such  a  way  to  identify  any  individual  and  shall  not  use  any  LDS  
information to contact any individual(s) to whom the Information relates. 
 
4.8 C
ompliance with Law and Los Angeles County EMS Agency Policies and Procedures 
-   Data  Recipient  shall  comply  with  all  applicable  federal  and  state  laws  and  
regulations, including the Standards for Electronic Transactions, 45 CFR Parts 160 
and  164,  if  applicable  under  the  terms  and  requirements  of  this  Agreement.  Data  
Recipient shall also comply with all applicable Los Angeles County EMS Agency and 
IRB policies and procedures. 
 
4.9 R
easonable Inspection - Within thirty (30) business days of a written request by Data 
Provider,  Data  Recipient  shall  allow  Data  Provider,  during  Data  Recipient’s  regular  
business  hours,  to  conduct  a  reasonable  inspection  of  Data  Recipient’s  books,  
records, agreements, and policies and procedures relating to the use or disclosure of 
the  LDS  for  the  purpose  of  determining  Data  Recipient’s  compliance  with  this  
Agreement. 
  

SUBJECT: DATA USE AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.4 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 4   OF 5 
5. Term and Termination 
 
5.1 Term  - The  provisions  of  this  Agreement  shall  be  effective  as  of  the  date  this  
Agreement is signed by both parties and shall terminate when all of the LDS provided 
by Data Provider to Data Recipient is destroyed or returned to Data Provider, or, if it 
is  infeasible  to  return  or  destroy  the  LDS,  Data  Recipient  shall  continue  to  
protect/safeguard such information in accordance with the termination provisions in 
this section. 
 
5.2 Effect  of  Termination  - Upon  termination  of  the  Agreement  for  any  reason,  Data  
Recipient shall return or, at the option of Data Provider, destroy all PHI received from 
Data Provider under this Data Use Agreement. If return or destruction is not feasible, 
Data Recipient shall continue to extend indefinitely the protections of this Amendment 
to such information, and immediately terminate any further use or disclosure of such 
PHI. 
 
5.3 This   Agreement   supersedes   all   previous   representations,   understanding   or   
agreements regarding the LDS and shall prevail notwithstanding any variance with 
terms and conditions of any document submitted by or on behalf of Data Recipient or 
Data Provider regarding the LDS. 
 
6. M
aterial Breach - A breach by Data Recipient of any material provision of this Amendment 
shall constitute a material breach of the Agreement, and shall provide grounds for immediate 
termination of this Agreement by Data Provider. 
 
7. I
ndemnification - Data Recipient shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless Data Provider 
and any of the providing entities affiliates, and their respective trustees, officers, directors, 
employees and agents from and against any claim, cause of action, liability, damage, cost or 
expense (including, without limitation, reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs) arising out 
of or in connection with any unauthorized or prohibited use or disclosure of the LDS or any 
other breach of this Agreement by the Data Recipient or any agent or person under its control. 
 
8. A
greement  -    This  Agreement  may  be  amended  by  mutual  written  agreement  of  the  Data  
Recipient and Data Provider. 
 
9. P
rovision -    If any provision in this Agreement should be held illegal or unenforceable by a 
court having jurisdiction, such provision shall be modified to the extent necessary to render 
it enforceable without losing its intent, or severed from this Agreement if no such modification 
is possible, and other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. 
 
10. R
elationship  - The  relationship  between  the  Data  Recipient  and  Data  Provider  is  that  of  
independent contractors and neither party nor its agents shall have any authority to bind the 
other party in any way. 
 
11. N
otices -    All notices shall be in writing and may be delivered in person, by courier, or sent 
by receipt e-mail or facsimile, or by 1
st
 class, postage prepaid US mail to the parties, which 
notice shall be deemed given upon receipt or three (3) day following deposit in the US mail.  
Either party may change the address for notices hereunder by providing written notice thereof 
to the other party in accordance with the terms of this section. 
 
  

SUBJECT: DATA USE AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.4 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 5   OF 5 
This Agreement, together with Reference Nos. 622.1, 622.2, 622.3, and 622.5, constitutes the entire 
agreement between us.  
 
If  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  Agreement  are  acceptable  to  you,  please  sign  a  copy  of  this  
Agreement in the space below and return a copy to us. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
__________________________________ 
Richard Tadeo 
Director, Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
(“Data Provider”) 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED AND AGREED TO BY: 
 
_________________________________ 
(“Data Recipient”) 
 
_________________________________ 
(Print Name) 
 
_________________________________ 
(Signature) 
 
_________________________________ 
(Date)
