# 1179869 1231 PSeizure

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SEIZURE Ref. No. 1231-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-03-25 PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
Base Hospital Contact: Required for status epilepticus or pregnant patients   
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) ❶ 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244-P, Traumatic Injury  
 
4. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308) 
 
5. If seizure stops spontaneously prior to EMS arrival and no seizure witnessed by EMS: 
Document Provider Impression – Seizure - Post 
 
6. For active seizure witnessed by EMS: ❷❸ 
 
0-11 months (Gray, Pink) 
Midazolam (5mg/mL) 0.2mg/kg IM/IN, dose per MCG 1309  
  Repeat x1 in 2 min prn, up to 2 doses prior to Base contact  
 
12-16 months (Red if age unknown) 
1.25 mg or 0.25mL IM/IN repeat x1 in 2 min prn 
Repeat x1 in 2 min prn, up to 2 doses prior to Base contact 
 
17 months – 5 years (Purple, Yellow, White if age unknown) 
Midazolam (5mg/mL) 2.5 mg or 0.5mL IM/IN  
Repeat x1 in 2 min prn, up to 2 doses prior to Base contact 
 
6-11 Years (Blue, Orange, Green if age unknown) 
Midazolam (5mg/mL) 5mg or 1mL IM/IN  
Repeat x1 in 2 min prn, up to 2 doses prior to Base contact 
 
≥12 years (Longer than the length-based tape if age unknown) 
Midazolam (5mg/mL) 10 mg or 2mL IM/IN  
Single dose prior to Base contact 
 
For patients with severe growth restriction (e.g., genetic disorder, severe malnutrition), administer 
weight-based dose per color code.❹ 
 
 CONTACT BASE for persistent seizure and for additional medication orders: ❺ 
May repeat Midazolam as above, maximum total of 3 doses or 20 milligrams, whichever is less. 
 
Document Provider Impression – Seizure – Active, even if seizure spontaneously resolves 
    
7. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
8. For persistent seizure or persistent ALOC: 
Check blood glucose 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SEIZURE Ref. No. 1231-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-03-25 PAGE 2 OF 3 
If < 60mg/dL or > 250mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203-P, Diabetic Emergencies  
 
9. Complete Paramedic Self Report, https://redcap.link/lacpedi-dose  
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SEIZURE Ref. No. 1231-P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-03-25 PAGE 3 OF 3 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
❶  Children with seizure may develop apnea; therefore, monitor oxygenation and ventilation including 
continuous pulse oximetry during seizure and after treatment with midazolam. Be prepared to initiate 
BMV. 
 
❷   Active seizures, including febrile seizures, may include tonic and/or clonic activity or focal seizure 
with altered level of consciousness. Eye deviation, clenched jaw, lip smacking or focal twitching may 
be subtle signs of seizure.  
 
❸ Seizures may occur as a result of underlying medical problems or toxic ingestions. Please make 
every effort to obtain a medical history and determine all medications/drugs that the patient may have 
taken.  
 
❹  Severe growth restriction is determined on clinical assessment when a patient is much smaller in size 
than expected for age due to an underlying medical condition (e.g., genetic disorder, severe 
malnutrition). A child that is simply small for their age would not be considered to have severe growth 
restriction. 
 
❺ Vital signs vary by age and normal ranges can be found in  MCG 1309.  Any pediatric patient with 
vital signs outside the normal range for age should be considered potentially ill and transported to an 
EDAP or PMC if criteria are met.  Pediatric patients who continue to seize after administration of 
midazolam should be transported to a PMC.
