# 1179887 1317.21 Hydroxocobalamin

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DRUG REFERENCE – HYDROXOCOBALAMIN Ref. No. 1317.21 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 1 
Classification 
 Synthetic B12, anti-anemic 
 
LA County Prehospital Indications 
Cyanide toxicity: cardiovascular, neurologic, and/or respiratory compromise due to suspected or known 
cyanide exposure 
 
Other Common Indications (Not authorized for EMS administration in LA County) 
 B12 deficiency 
 
Adult Dose 
5 grams (25mg/ml) reconstituted in 200mL of Normal Saline IV/IO and infused over 15 minutes, may 
repeat x1 in 15 minutes 
Pediatric Dose 
70mg/kg (25mg/ml) infused over 15 minutes [reconstitute 5 grams in 200mL of Normal Saline and infuse 
weight-based dose], may repeat x1 in 15 minutes 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Contains cobalt compounds that bind to and detoxify cyanide thereby preventing its binding to cytochrome 
c oxidase which leads to inhibition of cellular respiration.  
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Onset immediate 
Duration half-life 24 hours 
 
Contraindications 
Hypersensitivity 
 
Interactions 
Sodium thiosulfate, sodium nitrite 
 
Adverse Effects 
Allergic reactions 
Renal injury 
Increase in blood pressure 
 
Prehospital Considerations 
• Do not co-administer with other medications through the same vascular access; flush in between. 
• Avoid administration through the same IV/IO as blood products. 
• After administration pulse oximetry and co-oximetry will be inaccurate and may overestimate 
oxygenation and underestimate CO exposure. Skin, tears and urine will turn red; flushing is expected.  
• Hydroxocobalamin may interfere with laboratory tests for up to 24 hours.
