# 1179840 505APOT

COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES                                    
 
SUBJECT: AMBULANCE PATIENT OFFLOAD TIME (APOT) REFERENCE NO. 505 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 11-01-22 PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-23 
 
 
APPROVED:  __________________________       _______________________________  
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish a policy for the safe and rapid transfer of patient care 
responsibilities from emergency medical services (EMS) personnel to 
emergency department (ED) medical personnel. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5 Sections 1797.120, 1797.225 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Ambulance patient offload time (APOT): Time interval between the arrival of an ambulance at 
the location outside the hospital ED where the patient will be unloaded from the ambulance and 
the time the patient is transferred to the ED gurney, bed, chair or other acceptable location 
(facility equipment time) and the ED assumes responsibility for the care of the patient. The 
APOT Standard in Los Angeles County is within 30 minutes, 90% of the time. Currently, the 
data source for APOT is the EMS Providers’ electronic patient care report completed by the 
transporting unit. 
 
Facility Equipment Time: The time the patient is transferred to the ED gurney, bed, chair or 
other acceptable location. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. As per the Emergency Medical Treatment & Labor Act (EMTALA), the responsibility for 
patient care lies with the receiving facility once the patient arrives at the hospital 
property.  
 
2. Hospitals have the responsibility to ensure policies and processes are in place that 
facilitate the rapid and appropriate transfer of patient care from EMS personnel. Hospital 
staff shall make every effort to offload patients from ambulance gurneys as soon as 
possible. 
 
3. Extended APOT is a healthcare system and hospital throughput issue. Extended APOT 
negatively impacts EMS providers’ ability to respond to subsequent 9-1-1 calls resulting 
in delayed response times and may affect public safety and patient outcomes. 
 
4. Each hospital shall have a policy and a multidisciplinary team-based approach to ensure 
the ability of the facility to remain open to accept patients arriving by ambulance in the 
ED. 
 
5. Hospitals that have extended APOT should assign appropriate personnel to remain with 
patients while waiting for an ED treatment bay in order to release EMS personnel back 
to the community. 
 
6. The State of California Emergency Medical Services Authority has adopted 
Standardized Methods for Data Collection and Reporting of APOT which has been 
adopted by Los Angeles County. 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE PATIENT OFFLOAD TIME (APOT) REFERENCE NO. 505 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 5 
 
7. The accurate documentation by EMS professionals of the time metrics for APOT is 
imperative to appropriately evaluate and monitor APOT. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibilities of Hospital ED Personnel to Mitigate Extended APOT 
 
A. Immediately acknowledge EMS patient arrival and provide visual assessment; 
receive verbal patient report as soon as possible upon arrival in the ED to 
determine whether the patient needs an ED treatment bay or can be sent to other 
areas of the ED to await urgent or emergency care. 
 
B. Transfer patient to the hospital gurney, bed, chair, wheelchair or waiting room as 
appropriate for patient condition within 30 minutes of arrival at the ED. 
 
C. Confirm with EMS personnel the “facility equipment time” to be documented on 
the ePCR of the EMS personnel. 
 
D. If unable to immediately offload patient, provide a safe area in the ED within 
direct sight of ED medical personnel where the EMS personnel can temporarily 
wait while hospital’s patient remains on the ambulance gurney. 
 
E. Inform the ambulance transport crew of the anticipated time for the offload of the 
patient. 
 
F. For extended APOT, provide information to the onsite supervisor of EMS 
personnel regarding the steps that are being taken by the hospital to resolve 
extended APOT. 
 
G. Notify the Nursing Supervisor/Administrator on Duty that the ED is experiencing 
extended APOT and request assistance with patient throughput challenges. 
 
II. Responsibilities of EMS Personnel to Mitigate Extended APOT 
 
A. Upon arrival at ED, EMS personnel will present to the customary ambulance 
receiving area for a triage assessment by assigned ED staff (e.g., charge nurse). 
 
B. Provide a verbal patient report to assigned ED staff, transfer patient to hospital 
equipment as directed by ED staff. 
 
C. If the APOT estimate is ≥ 30 minutes, and the patient meets ALL criteria listed 
below, EMS personnel will inform the appropriate ED staff (e.g., charge nurse) 
that the patient will be offloaded in the waiting room. EMS personnel shall 
provide a transfer of care report to the appropriate ED staff (e.g., triage nurse). 
 
1. Age 18 years or older; or pediatric patients if accompanied by an adult 
 
2. Normal mental status (GCS 15) 
 
3. Normal vital signs upon arrival to the ED per Ref. No. 1380 for adults 
• SBP ≥ 90mmHg 
• HR 60-100 
• RR 12-20 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE PATIENT OFFLOAD TIME (APOT) REFERENCE NO. 505 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 5 
• O2 Saturation ≥94% on room air 
• Or per Ref. No. 1309 for pediatrics 
 
4. Ambulatory with steady gait without assistance (as appropriate for age) 
 
5. Without suicidal ideation or suspected substance abuse and not on 
psychiatric hold (i.e., 5585 (pediatric), 5150 (adult)) 
 
6. No chest pain, syncope, or acute neurologic symptoms (e.g., focal 
weakness, dizziness/vertigo) 
 
7. No ongoing ALS intervention required 
 
8. Patients who received medications that may require ongoing 
reassessment (e.g., naloxone, narcotics, epinephrine) shall be discussed 
with the appropriate ED staff (e.g., triage nurse) prior to being offloaded in 
the waiting room. 
 
D. If APOT estimate is > 30 minutes and the patient does not meet the criteria listed 
in II. C., each individual EMS personnel (EMT or Paramedic), in order to facilitate 
EMS field operations, may observe up to 4 patients within their scope of practice 
at the discretion of the EMS provider’s supervisor, while awaiting patient offload 
to facility equipment.   
 
1. Coordination will be done by the EMS Provider agency’s on-site 
supervisor to identify the EMS personnel who will monitor patients 
awaiting transfer of care to ED staff and those that may be released to 
accept other emergency calls. 
 
2. Hospitals should provide gurneys or cots for these patients, to allow EMS 
personnel to maintain their field operations. 
 
3. EMS Provider agency’s on-site supervisor may authorize the placement 
of temporary cots to house EMS patients being observed by EMS 
personnel awaiting transfer of care to ED staff.  
 
E. Document the “facility equipment time” on the electronic patient care record 
(ePCR) to capture the time patient care is transferred to ED personnel. This shall 
be done in consultation with hospital licensed personnel accepting responsibility 
for the care of the patient. 
 
F. Notify EMS Supervisor if Provider ALS Diversion Threshold is met as defined in 
Ref. No. 503.1.   
 
III. Responsibilities of the EMS Agency 
 
A. The EMS Agency will routinely analyze and report APOT data. Hospitals that do 
not meet the APOT Standard will be notified and may be requested to develop a 
corrective action plan. 
 
B. At any given time, the EMS Agency via the Medical Alert Center (MAC) will 
establish phone notification with hospital administration in instances wherein 3 or 
more ambulance transport crew are waiting to offload for time periods of 30 
minutes or more. 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE PATIENT OFFLOAD TIME (APOT) REFERENCE NO. 505 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 4 OF 5 
 
C. After an evaluation of a hospital’s status and regional/system resources, the EMS 
Agency via the MAC may place a hospital on Specialty Care Center Diversion 
(e.g., Trauma, STEMI, Stroke) in addition to ED ALS and/or ED BLS Diversion in 
instances wherein the APOT is estimated to exceed 2 hours. 
 
D. In instances whereby extended APOT threatens public health and safety by 
preventing EMS response to emergency medical incidents, the EMS Agency, 
with appropriate notification to hospital, may authorize EMS personnel provided 
the patient meets ALL the criteria listed in II.C to: 
 
1. Inform ED medical personnel that they are transitioning patient care and  
 
2. Immediately offload patient to a hospital bed or other suitable hospital sitting 
or reclining device as appropriate for patient condition.  
 
In these instances, EMS personnel shall make every attempt to notify ED Charge 
Nurse that they must immediately return to service. EMS personnel shall provide 
a verbal transfer of care report to ED medical personnel. 
 
E. Procedure for requesting corrective action plan from hospitals that have 
persistent delays in APOT 
  
Month Action 1 Audit Result Action 2 
1
st
 
EMS Agency 
audits 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital consistently 
demonstrate 
prolonged APOT, 
and EMS Providers 
have consistently 
requested to place 
Hospital on ALS 
and/or BLS Diversion  
EMS Agency notifies hospital’s 
ED Director and ED Nurse 
Manager, via email or telephone, 
of audit results, requests 
corrective action plan and assists 
in determining solutions. 
2
nd
 
EMS Agency 
re-evaluates 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital fails to demonstrate 
incremental improvement in 
APOT. 
EMS Agency sends a written 
notice to Hospital’s ED Director 
and Nurse Manager notifying 
them of the audit results and 
their non-compliance. 
Hospital implements 
corrective action plan and 
demonstrates improvement 
in APOT. 
Monitor to ensure Hospital 
maintains improvement in 
APOT. 
3
rd
 
EMS Agency 
re-evaluates 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital continues to fail to 
demonstrate incremental 
improvement in APOT. 
EMS Agency notifies Hospital’s 
CEO in writing of audit results 
and request a corrective action 
plan be submitted within 15 
calendar days. 
Hospital implements 
corrective action plan and 
demonstrates improvement 
in APOT. 
Monitor to ensure Hospital 
maintains improvement in APOT. 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE PATIENT OFFLOAD TIME (APOT) REFERENCE NO. 505 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 5 OF 5 
Month Action 1 Audit Result Action 2 
4
th
 
EMS Agency 
re-evaluates 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital continues to fail to 
demonstrate incremental 
improvement in APOT. 
Within 15 days of the EMS 
Agency’s receipt of Hospital’s 
corrective action plan, a written 
approval or request additional 
modifications to the plan. 
Hospital implements 
corrective action plan and 
demonstrates improvement 
in APOT. 
 
Monitor to ensure Hospital 
maintains improvement in 
APOT. 
5
th
 
EMS Agency 
re-evaluates 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital continues to fail to 
demonstrate incremental 
improvement in APOT. 
EMS will request modification 
to Hospital’s corrective action 
plan. 
Hospital implements 
corrective action plan and 
demonstrates improvement 
in APOT. 
Monitor to ensure Hospital 
maintains improvement in 
APOT. 
6
th
 
EMS Agency 
re-evaluates 
Hospital’s 
compliance 
with APOT 
Standard. 
Hospital continues to fail to 
demonstrate incremental 
improvement in APOT 
See Policy III.F. 
Hospital’s compliance 
threshold improves. 
Monitor to ensure Hospital 
maintains improvement in 
APOT. 
 
F. Failure of a hospital to implement corrective action plan to improve APOT six months 
after initial request from EMS to implement corrective action plan may result in 
additional action from the EMS Agency, which may include but not limited to: 
 
1. Reduction in 9-1-1 transports to hospital 
 
2. Temporary suspension of Specialty Care Center Designation 
 
3. Others as identified 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 503.1, Diversion Request Requirements for Emergency Department Saturation 
 
California EMSA: Ambulance Patient Offload Time (APOT) Standardized Methods for Data 
Collection and Reporting
