# 1179050 622.2

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
SUBJECT: LIMITED DATA SET INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 622.2 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-16 PAGE 1   OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
Data Request Tr
acking Number: (To be completed by the EMS Agency) ___________________ 
Data Recipi
ent Name: 
1.Indicate the data source(s) for the Limited Data Set:
a. 
 Base Hospital Database
•Data Dictionary
•Base hospital data for all Notifications and Base Contacts
b. 
 LAC-   EMS NEMSIS Database *Started as of October 1, 2023 
•Data Dictionary
•EMS data for all 9-1-1 activations (including both transported and non-transported
patients)
c. 
 EMS Documentation Manual *Retired as of September 30, 2023 
•Data Dictionary
•EMS data for all 9-1-1 activations (including both transported and non-transported
patients)
d. 
 STEMI Receiving Center Database 
•Data Dictionary
•EMS and hospital data for all patients with suspected and/or confirmed STEMI
transported to a designated STEMI Receiving Center
e. 
 Stroke Center Database 
•Data Dictionary
•EMS and hospital data for all patients with suspected and/or confirmed stroke
transported at a designated Approved Stroke Center
f. 
 Trauma Center Database 
•Data Dictionary
•EMS and hospital data for trauma patients transported to a designated Trauma
Center
g. 
 Other (please specify): 
2.Date range for data requested:
-

SUBJECT: LIMITED DATA SET INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 622.2 
PAGE 2   OF 2 
3.Data Elements Requested
Please identify the requested data elements in the appropriate spreadsheet:
a.Base Hospital D
atabase
b. LAC-EMS NEMSIS Database
c. EMS Documentation Manual 
d.STEMI Receiving Center Database
e.Stroke 
Center Database
f.Trauma Center Database 
Guidance: 
•Use the r
elevant data dictionary listed in Section #1 to find the exact definitions for each
variable.
•Available variables may change from year to year. We can assist in variable selection
for with complex requests.
•Depending on the number of variables requested, the data may be provided in multiple
tables with a linking ID.
•Some data elements have multiple entries (i.e.,  multiple vital sign entries per patient)
and this may affect the way in which the data is  structured (i.e., l  ong vs wide data
format). We will work with each requestor to provide data in a format that is usable.
•Please be aware that some data elements are protected health information and cannot
be released. See the Notes section of each spreadsheet for additional information.
