# 1179832 215ELCoR

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT  
CO-RESPONSE COMMITTEE (ELCoR) REFERENCE NO. 215 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 04-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  
SUPERSEDES:  
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish a forum for exchange of ideas to support a collaborative approach 
between EMS and Law Enforcement by providing recommendations for 
improvement in EMS policy, practice, and training. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Committee Activities: 
 
Functions of the ELCoR shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
A. Provide operational insights for EMS and Law Enforcement co-response. 
 
B. Identify EMS and Law Enforcement co-response high-risk situations. 
 
C. Develop recommendations for EMS and Law Enforcement co-response in Los 
Angeles County to inform the EMS Agency Director and Medical Director. 
 
D. Develop education and training resources used to support EMS and Law 
Enforcement co-response. 
 
II. Meeting Frequency: 
 
The Committee will meet quarterly (additional meetings may be held as determined by 
the chair). 
 
III. Committee Membership shall include: 
 
A. EMS Agency Medical Director (will act as Chair). 
 
B. Fire Chief or designee from the three largest Public Provider Agencies. 
 
C. Fire Chief or designee as selected by the Los Angeles County Area Fire Chiefs 
Association (LAAFCA) from a department not represented by section III.B. 
 
D. Police Chief or designee of the three largest Law Enforcement Agencies. 
 
E. Police Chief or designee selected by the Los Angeles County Police Chiefs’ 
Association (LACPCA) from a department not represented by section III.D. 
 
F. Two Public Provider Agency Medical Directors selected by Medical Council. 
 
G. Two Law Enforcement Agency Medical Directors selected by Medical Council. 
 
H. A Prehospital Care Coordinator selected by Association of Prehospital Care 
Coordinators (APCC). 

SUBJECT: EMS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
CO-RESPONSE (ELCoR) COMMITTEE REFERENCE NO. 215 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
I. A Public Provider Paramedic Coordinator selected by the Los Angeles County 
Area Fire Chiefs Association (LAAFCA). 
 
J. An EMS educator with current or prior working experience as a public sector 
Paramedic from a Paramedic or EMT training program selected by the Los 
Angeles County Area Fire Chiefs Association (LAAFCA) or the EMS Agency. 
 
K. A Law Enforcement Officer currently working as a Paramedic in Los Angeles 
County, selected by the Los Angeles County Police Chiefs’ Association 
(LACPCA) or the EMS Agency. 
 
L. An EMS educator selected by the California Nurse and EMS Professionals  
(CAL-NEP) Association. 
 
IV. Workgroups: 
 
A. Workgroups will be developed on the recommendation of the committee to 
address identified priorities. 
 
B. The EMS Agency and ELCoR committee members will identify subject matter 
experts to support the workgroup activities. 
 
C. Subject Matter Experts will be invited to join by the Chair and/or committee 
members on an “as needed” basis. 
 
D. The workgroup products will be brought back to the committee for input and 
approval. 
 
V. ELCoR Recommendations: 
 
A. ELCoR recommendations of improvement, content, or distribution will be 
forwarded to the EMS Agency Director and EMS Agency Medical Director once 
approved by the committee. 
 
B. ELCoR recommendations which extend beyond EMS policy, practice, and 
training are at the discretion of the respective members and stakeholders. 
 
C. A summary of ELCoR recommendations will be maintained by the EMS Agency 
and can be accessed by system stakeholders upon request. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Reference No. 1037.4, MCG: EMS and Law Enforcement Co-Response
