# 1179837 320.2SampleSTEMIMOU

COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
 
SUBJECT: SAMPLE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING  
 AGREEMENT FOR INTER-FACILITY TRANSFER  REFERENCE NO. 320.2 
 OF ACUTE STEMI PATIENTS 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 09-01-16 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-24 
This Transfer Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “AGREEMENT”) between 
_______________________ Medical Center and _______________________ Medical Center, 
bearing the effective date of ______/_______/_______ is made and entered into as of the date 
of execution below, by and between 
_____________________________________________ the ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction 
(STEMI) Receiving Center (SRC) (hereinafter referred to as “SRC”), and 
_____________________________________________ the STEMI Referral Facility (SRF) 
(hereinafter referred to as “SRF”), and sets forth in full, completely, and exclusively of any 
understandings which shall be controlling over this AGREEMENT. 
 
This AGREEMENT is to provide for the specific transfer of STEMI patients from 
_______________________________, a SRF, to ___________________________, a SRC 
with the intent to provide emergency angiography for STEMI in the cardiac catheterization 
laboratory (cath lab) and primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) when clinically 
appropriate. 
The following is to occur prior to transfer: 
 
SRF Responsibilities: 
 
• Email or Fax the patient’s STEMI ECG to (______) _______-________. 
 
• Call ____________________ at (______) _______-_________ for patient acceptance. 
 
• Appropriate transport modality should be made in consultation with the receiving SRC – 
it is the responsibility of the SRF to ensure the appropriate level of transport. 
 

SUBJECT: SAMPLE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING REFERENCE NO. 320.2 
 AGREEMENT FOR INTER-FACILITY TRANSFER OF 
 ACUTE STEMI PATIENTS 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
• Call 9-1-1 after the STEMI patient is packaged and ready for immediate transport – 9-1-1 
transports are reserved for Emergency Department STEMI patients requiring emergent 
PCI. 
 
• For inpatient STEMI patients and/or NSTEMI patients requiring transport to the SRC for 
higher level of care, arrange for appropriate level of care transport via private 
ambulance and follow hospital policy for transfer. Do not call 9-1-1.  
 
• Send any available records with the patient without delaying transport – other 
information, not sent at the time of transfer may be sent at a later time. 
 
SRC Responsibilities: 
 
• Accept the transfer as appropriate – decision is at the discretion of the ED physician or 
interventional cardiologist after reviewing the patient history and 12-lead ECG. 
 
• Notify the cath lab as per hospital protocol. 
 
 
IN WITNESS, WHEREOF, we have executed this AGREEMENT on the dates written below: 
 
STEMI Referral Facility:  _______________________________________________________ 
Signature: _____________________________ 
Print Name: _____________________________ 
Title: ___________________________________ 
Date: ____________ 
 
STEMI Receiving Center:  ______________________________________________________ 
Signature: _____________________________ 
Print Name: _____________________________ 
Title: ___________________________________ 
Date: ____________
