# 1179876 1240HAZMAT

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 4 
 
Contact Medical Alert Center (MAC) for all MCIs prior to transport otherwise notify the receiving 
hospital.  
 
1. Secure area, establish incident site, and don protective equipment/gear appropriate for 
hazardous material exposure according to the provider agency protocol 
 
2. If MCI, begin triage (Ref. 519.2 and Ref. 519.5) 
Provide MAC with the following incident information: properties of contaminant, type of 
decontamination performed, signs/symptoms, and smells 
 
3. Remove patient from source if safe to do so, and move to decontamination area prn  
 
4. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
5. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302) 
 
6. Remove patient’s clothing 
 
7. Flush skin, eyes and mucous membranes with copious amounts of water  
For eye involvement, irrigate with Normal Saline 1L during transport; allow patient to remove 
contact lenses if possible. 
 
8. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-lead ECG prn 
For patients with dysrhythmias, treat in conjunction with TP 1212, Cardiac Dysrhythmia-
Bradycardia or TP 1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia- Tachycardia 
 
9. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
10. Assess for signs of trauma 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury 
 
11. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
12. Consider contacting the Poison Control Center in conjunction with the Base Hospital for 
assistance with management of toxins (Ref. 805) 
 
 
NERVE AGENT EXPOSURE 
 
13. If multiple symptomatic patients with > 50 victims involved, request EMS Chempack from the 
MAC (Ref. 1108) 
 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 4 
14. For SEVERE EXPOSURE: ❶ 
Begin treatment immediately (concurrent with decontamination) and transport after 
decontamination procedures are completed  
DuoDote (Atropine 2.1mg and Pralidoxime Chloride 600mg) IM x3, one after another 
 
For seizure, treat in conjunction with TP 1231, Seizure 
 
15. For MODERATE EXPOSURE: ❶ 
Ensure decontamination procedures are completed before treatment or transport to facility 
DuoDote IM x2, one after another 
 
16. For MILD EXPOSURE: ❶  
Ensure decontamination procedures are completed before treatment or transport to facility 
DuoDote IM x1  
 
17. If symptoms in MILD or MODERATE exposures progress after initial evaluation, administer 
additional DuoDote IM for a total of 3 doses 
 
18. For EMS CHEMPACK Deployment: 
EMS CHEMPACK may be used for repeat dosing as necessary 
Repeat Atropine dose prn 5 minutes after initial emergency DuoDote 
Repeat Pralidoxime dose prn 60 minutes after initial emergency DuoDote 
 
For seizure, treat in conjunction with TP 1231, Seizure, or Diazepam 10mg/mL autoinjector 
IM x 1 
 
 
ORGANOPHOSPHATE EXPOSURE 
 
19. For heart rate < 60bpm, hypotension, respiratory depression and/or extreme salivation 
Atropine 2mg (20mL) IV/IO ❷ 
May be repeated every 5 min until patient is asymptomatic 
 
For seizure, treat in conjunction with TP 1231, Seizure 
 
RADIOLOGIC EXPOSURE 
 
20. If radiation contamination is suspected, confirm by using appropriate detection devices 
available through Department of Public Health (DPH), Radiation Management at (213) 989-
7140 
 
21. If radiation contamination present, identify the cause of the contamination ❸ 
Internal Radiation is exposure through open wound, ingestion or inhalation of radioactive 
materials 
External Radiation is exposure through a Radiological Dispersal Device (RDD), Radiological 
Material Release (RMR) or Radiological Exposure Device (RED) 
 
22. For External Radiation: 
If a RDD is used and in the absence of any other information, evacuate 1,650 feet in all 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 4 
directions from the detonation site and then contact the MAC ❸ 
Notify DPH Radiation Management at (213) 989-7140 if departmental HAZMAT team is not 
available and prolonged exposures are expected ❹  
 
23. For patients with a life threatening condition: 
Treat using appropriate treatment protocol based on complaints in conjunction with 
decontamination 
Remove the outer clothing and utilize containment mitigation techniques before transport 
 
24. For patients without a life threatening condition: 
Decontaminate using departmental protocols 
Treat using appropriate treatment protocol based on complaints 
 
25. Asymptomatic and minimal exposure suspected: 
Decontaminate and release patient if appropriate ❺ 
 
CYANIDE EXPOSURE 
 
26. For patients with cardiovascular, neurologic, and/or respiratory compromise due to suspected 
or known cyanide exposure: 
Hydroxocobalamin 5 grams in 200mL of Normal Saline IV/IO (25mg/ml) infused over 15 
minutes 
May repeat x1 in 15 min 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT Ref. No. 1240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 04-01-25 PAGE 4 OF 4 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶    Nerve agent exposure symptom severity: 
 SEVERE: severe respiratory distress, respiratory arrest, cyanosis, extreme SLUDGE (salivation,     
lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastrointestinal distress and emesis) seizures, unconsciousness 
      MODERATE: miosis, rhinorrhea, shortness of breath, vomiting, diarrhea 
 MILD: miosis, rhinorrhea and increased salivation 
 
❷    High cumulative doses may be required, maximum single dose 2mg. 
  
❸    Radiation Exposure Safety: 
      Exposure to victims with internal radiation poses low-to-no risk to EMS personnel  
      Exposure to victims with external radiation exposure poses low-to-moderate risk to EMS personnel  
      Remember the following principles: 
Time: limit time with the victim to a minimum 
Distance: the further away from the source, the smaller the dose received. 
Shielding: “Turnouts” will protect from alpha and beta emitters, wear respiratory protection if 
particulate matter (i.e., dust or powder) present 
 
❹    The HazMat team, MAC, or DPH Radiation Management will be able to redefine boundaries, 
establish radiation dose guidelines, assist with monitoring and decontamination procedures, and 
provide support to on-scene responders. These resources may also refer to Emergency Response 
Guidebook for other recommended scene precautions. 
 
❺    If number of patients exceeds available resources, asymptomatic patients with minimal exposure 
may be released for home decontamination.
