# 1179833 222Downgrade

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-30-99  PAGE 1 OF 6 
REVISED:  04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish a procedure to be followed if a general acute care facility plans to 
downgrade or eliminate emergency medical services; eliminate perinatal or 
inpatient psychiatric services or close the hospital completely. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations 70105(a), 70351(a), 70351(b)(1), 70351(b)(5), 
70367(a) 
Health and Safety Code, Sections 1255.1, 1255.2, 1255.25, 1300  
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Hospitals with a basic or comprehensive emergency department permit provide a unique 
service and an important link to the community in which they are located. In certain 
instances, the reduction or withdrawal of these services may have a profound impact on 
the emergency medical services (EMS) available in their area and to the community at 
large. 
 
2. Every effort should be made to ensure that essential emergency medical services are 
continued until emergency care can be provided by other facilities, or until EMS providers 
can adjust resources to accommodate anticipated needs. 
 
3. Before any changes are finalized, the EMS Agency should have sufficient time and 
opportunity to develop an EMS Impact Evaluation Report (IER) that examines the 
closure’s effect on the community. 
 
4. Before approving a downgrade or closure of emergency medical, perinatal or inpatient 
psychiatric services, the California State Department of Public Health (CDPH) shall 
receive a copy of the IER to determine the expected impact of the changes, including 
access to emergency care and the effect of the closure on emergency services provided 
by other entities. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
I. Responsibilities of the Health Facility Proposing the Downgrade or Closure 
 
A. As soon as possible but not later than 180 days prior to a planned reduction of 
EMS services or closing of a health facility, or 120 days prior to eliminating 
perinatal or inpatient psychiatric services, the facility shall provide a written notice 
of the proposed downgrade or elimination of said services to the following entities: 
 
1. The EMS Agency. 
 

SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
PAGE 2 OF 6 
2. The local government entity in charge of the provision of health services 
and the Board of Supervisors of the county in which the health facility is 
located. 
 
3. The city council of the city in which the health facility is located. 
 
4. The CDPH, Licensing and Certification Division. 
 
5. All health care service plans. 
 
6. Other entities under contract with the hospital that provide services to 
enrollees. 
 
B.  Not less than 180 days prior to closing a health facility or reducing EMS services, 
or 120 days prior to eliminating perinatal or inpatient psychiatric services, the 
facility shall provide public notice, including a notice posted at the entrance to all 
affected facilities: 
 
 The required notice shall include: 
 
1. A description of the proposed reduction or elimination. 
 
2. The description shall be limited to publicly available data, including the 
number of beds eliminated, if any, the probable decrease in the number of 
personnel, and a summary of any service that is being eliminated, if 
applicable. 
 
3. A description of the three nearest available comparable services in the 
community. If the health facility closing these services serves Medi-Cal or 
Medicare patients, the health facility shall specify if the providers of the 
nearest available comparable services serve these patients. 
 
4. A telephone number and address for each of the following where interested 
parties may offer comments: 
 
a. The health facility. 
 
b. The parent entity, if any, or contracted company, if any, that acts as 
the corporate administrator of the health facility. 
 
c. The chief executive officer. 
 
5. The notice shall be provided in a manner that is likely to reach a significant 
number of community residents serviced by the facility to include: 
 
a. A continuous notice posted in a conspicuous location on the home 
page of the health facility’s internet website. 
 
b. A notice published in a conspicuous location within a newspaper of 
general circulation serving the geographical area in which the facility 

SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
PAGE 3 OF 6 
is located. The notice shall continue for a minimum of 15 
publications dates. 
 
c. A continuous notice posted in a conspicuous location within the 
internet website of a newspaper of general circulation serving the 
local geographical area in which the facility is located. 
 
d. A notice posted at the entrance of every community clinic within Los 
Angeles County that grants voluntary permission for posting. 
 
 
6. The facility should make reasonable efforts at public notice including, but 
not limited to: 
 
a. Advertising the change in terms easily understood by a layperson. 
 
b. Soliciting media coverage regarding the change. 
 
c. Informing patients of the facility of the impending change. 
 
d. Notifying contracting health care service plans. 
 
7. For elimination of perinatal and inpatient psychiatric services ONLY, the 
public notice shall also include: 
 
a. Statistically, deidentified and aggregated data about the health  
  facility’s patients who received either inpatient psychiatric services 
  or perinatal services as applicable, within the past five (5) years,  
  including, but not limited to all of the following: 
 
i. The conditions treated. 
 
ii. The ethnicities of patient served if patient voluntarily shared 
  their ethnicity with the health facility.  Data on ethnicities  
  shall only be shared on the public notice to the extent to  
  which is does not disclose any personal information in a  
  manner that would link the information disclosed to the  
  individual to whom it pertains. 
 
iii. The ages of patients served. 
 
iv. Whether the patients served had private insurance, Medi- 
  Cal, Medicare, or no insurance. 
 
v. A justification for the health facilities to eliminate services. 
 
8. This does not apply to county facilities subject to Health & Safety Code 
Section 1442.5. 
 

SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
PAGE 4 OF 6 
C.  Notify planning or zoning authorities of the proposed downgrade or closure 
 of 9-1-1 receiving hospital or emergency medical services so that street signage 
 can be removed. 
 
D. A hospital is not subject to the above if CDPH: 
 
1. Determines that the use of resources to keep the emergency department 
(ED) open substantially threatens the stability of the hospital as a whole. 
 
2. Cites the ED for unsafe staffing practices. 
 
II. Responsibilities of the Local EMS Agency  
 
A. Develop an IER in consultation with impacted hospitals and 9-1-1 providers.  
  Include, at minimum, the following evaluation criteria if downgrading or closing  
 9-1-1 receiving hospital or emergency medical services: 
 
1. The hospital’s geographic proximity to other facilities within a five and ten 
mile radius. 
 
2. The annual number of 9-1-1 basic life support (BLS) and advanced life 
support (ALS) transports. 
 
3. The number of ED treatment stations and total emergency department 
volume. 
 
4. The number of paramedic contacts per month if the hospital is a paramedic 
base hospital. 
 
5. The number of trauma patients received per month if the hospital is a 
designated trauma center. 
 
6. The number of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) patients 
received per month if the hospital is a designated STEMI receiving center. 
 
7. The number of stroke patients received per month if the hospital is a 
designated stroke center. 
 
8. The number of perinatal patients received per month if hospital is closing 
perinatal services. 
 
9. The number of psychiatric patients received per month if hospital is closing 
inpatient psychiatric unit. 
 
10. A list of the services provided by the hospital and the surrounding facilities 
(Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP), STEMI Receiving 
Center, Pediatric Medical Center (PMC), Disaster Resource Center (DRC), 
Approved Stroke Center, Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) Center, 
burn, perinatal, inpatient psychiatric, Trauma Center). 
 
11. The average emergency department diversion of surrounding facilities. 

SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
PAGE 5 OF 6 
 
B. If the facility is closing only perinatal and/or inpatient psychiatric unit, develop an 
IER in consultation with impacted hospitals and 9-1-1 providers. Include, at 
minimum, the following evaluation criteria: 
 
1. The hospital’s geographic proximity to other facilities within a five and ten 
mile radius. 
 
2. The number of perinatal patients received per month if hospital is closing 
perinatal services. 
 
3. The number of psychiatric patients received per month if hospital is closing 
inpatient psychiatric unit. 
 
4. A list of the services provided by the hospital and the surrounding facilities 
(Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP), perinatal, 
inpatient psychiatric, as applicable. 
 
C. Conduct at least one public hearing if the service being downgraded or closed is 
the facility’s perinatal, inpatient psychiatric unit(s) or emergency department. The 
public hearing shall be conducted by the Emergency Medical Services Commission 
(EMSC). 
 
1. The EMSC may hold the public hearing at their normally scheduled meeting 
or convene a special meeting at the request of the Director of the EMS 
Agency. 
 
2. The hearing shall be held within 30 days following notification of the intent 
to downgrade or close emergency medical services or 60 days following 
notification of intent to close perinatal or inpatient psychiatric services. 
 
D. Reconfigure the EMS system as needed. If the EMS Agency determines that the 
downgrade or closure of a hospital ED, perinatal service or psychiatric inpatient 
unit will significantly impact the EMS system, the Agency shall: 
 
1. Determine the reason(s) a hospital has applied to do so; and 
 
2. Determine whether any system changes may be implemented to maintain 
the hospital services within the system; or 
 
3. Develop strategies to accommodate the loss of the ED or other identified 
specialized service to the system. 
 
E. Forward the IER to the Board of Supervisors for adoption. 
 
F. Forward the IER to CDPH within three days of its adoption by the Board of 
Supervisors and within 60 calendar days after the initial notification from hospital of 
the proposed downgrade or closure. 
 
III. III. Following receipt of the IER, CDPH shall notify the hospital, in writing, of its decision 
regarding the application to downgrade or close emergency services or the facility. 

SUBJECT: DOWNGRADE OR CLOSURE OF 9-1-1 RECEIVING  
 HOSPITAL, PERINATAL, INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC OR EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES REFERENCE NO. 222 
 
PAGE 6 OF 6 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 206, Emergency Medical Services Commission Ordinance No. 12332 - Chapter 
3.20 of the Los Angeles County Code
