# 1179866 1200.3ProviderImpression

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 1 OF 6 
 
GENERAL RULES: 
 
1. This is a list of all the provider impressions (PI) in alphabetical order by PI name. 
 
2. The following columns list the associated Treatment Protocol (TP) name and number. Use the 
corresponding “__-P” protocol if patient ≤ 14 years of age. 
 
3. The last column provides guideline about the use of the PI. 
 
 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Abdominal 
Pain/Problems 
(GI/GU) 
ABOP GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For any pain or problem in the 
abdominal/flank region that does not have a 
more specific PI, includes post-surgical 
complications. 
Airway Obstruction/ 
Choking 
CHOK Airway Obstruction 
1234 
1234-P 
For any upper airway emergency including 
choking, foreign body, swelling, stridor, 
croup, and obstructed tracheostomy 
Alcohol Intoxication ETOH 
Overdose/ 
Poisoning/Ingestion 
1241 
1241-P 
For alcohol intoxication if it is the primary 
problem. Use of secondary PI if the patient 
has another acute emergency. 
Allergic Reaction ALRX Allergy 
1219 
1219-P 
For any simple allergic reaction that is 
isolated to the skin (hives/ urticarial only) and 
does not meet definition of anaphylaxis 
ALOC - Not 
Hypoglycemia or 
Seizure 
ALOC ALOC 
1229 
1229-P 
For altered mental status not attributed to a 
more specific PI (i.e., cause unknown). Use 
as secondary PI when cause known. 
Anaphylaxis ANPH Allergy 
1219 
1219-P 
For anaphylaxis. 
Behavioral/ 
Psychiatric Crisis 
PSYC 
Behavioral/ 
Psychiatric Crisis 
1209 
1209-P 
For psychiatric crisis that is the primary 
problem. NOT for anxiety/agitation 
secondary to medical etiology – use PI 
related to medical issue.  
Body Pain – 
Non Traumatic 
BPNT General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For pain not related to trauma that is not 
localized to chest, abdomen, head, or 
extremity. 
BRUE BRUE BRUE 1235-P 
For a brief resolved unexplained event 
(BRUE). Patient must be ≤12 months of age 
and back to baseline on assessment.   
Burns BURN Burns 
1220 
1220-P 
For any burn injury to skin. For inhalation 
injury use PI Inhalation Injury. Use with PI 
Traumatic Injury if other trauma present. 
Carbon Monoxide COMO 
Carbon Monoxide 
Exposure 
1238 
1238-P 
For suspected or known carbon monoxide 
exposure. 
Cardiac Arrest – Non-
traumatic 
CANT Cardiac Arrest 
1210 
1210-P 
For non-traumatic cardiac arrest in which any 
resuscitation is initiated, NOT dead on 
arrival. 
Cardiac Dysrhythmia DYSR 
Cardiac 
Dysrhythmia – 
1212 
1212-P 
For any bradycardic rhythm <60bpm. 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 2 OF 6 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Bradycardia 
Cardiac Dysrhythmia DYSR 
Cardiac 
Dysrhythmia – 
Tachycardia 
1213 
1213-P 
For any tachydysrhythmia and for sinus 
tachycardia (ST) of unclear etiology. NOT for 
ST secondary to known cause – use more 
specific PI (e.g., Fever) 
Chest Pain – 
Not Cardiac 
CPNC General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For musculoskeletal and pleuritic pain and 
any chest pain that is NOT of possible 
cardiovascular etiology. 
Chest Pain – STEMI CPMI Cardiac Chest Pain 1211 
For any suspected STEMI, with or without 
chest pain. 
Chest Pain – 
Suspected Cardiac 
CPSC Cardiac Chest Pain 1211 
For any chest pain/symptom that is of 
possible cardiovascular etiology but NOT 
STEMI (e.g., NSTEMI, pericarditis, 
dissection). 
Childbirth (Mother) BRTH Childbirth (Mother) 
1215 
1215-P 
For delivery or imminent delivery of a fetus 
beyond the first trimester (12 weeks). For 
<12 weeks use PI Pregnancy Complications. 
Cold / Flu Symptoms COFL General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For minor respiratory illness in a patient 
without shortness of breath or wheezing; 
must have normal respiratory rate and O
2
 sat 
(if available). 
Diarrhea DRHA GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For diarrhea without bleeding. NOT for 
melena, use PI Upper GI Bleeding. 
Dizziness/Vertigo DIZZ Dizziness/Vertigo 
1230 
1230-P 
For lightheadedness or vertigo, without 
syncope. 
DOA – Obvious 
Death 
DEAD Cardiac Arrest 
1210 
1210-P 
For non-traumatic cardiac arrest found dead 
on arrival such that no resuscitation is 
initiated. 
Dystonic Reaction DYRX Dystonic Reaction 
1239 
1239-P 
For suspected dystonic reaction (i.e., 
reaction, typically from antipsychotic 
medications, causing abnormal contraction 
of head and neck muscles.) 
Electrocution ELCT Electrocution 
1221 
1221-P 
For any electrocution injury. 
ENT / Dental 
Emergencies 
ENTP 
ENT / Dental 
Emergencies 
1226 
1226-P 
For a problem located in the ear, nose, 
throat area, except NOT epistaxis – use PI 
Epistaxis, NOT airway obstruction – use PI 
Airway Obstruction. 
Epistaxis NOBL 
ENT / Dental 
Emergencies 
1226 
1226-P 
For any bleeding from the nares. 
Extremity Pain/ 
Swelling – Non-
Traumatic 
EXNT General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For pain, swelling, or other non-traumatic 
problem of an extremity, includes rashes and 
non-traumatic bleeding (e.g., varicose vein 
bleed). 
Eye Problem – 
Unspecified 
EYEP Eye Problem 
1228 
1228-P 
For any pain or problem of the eye or 
periorbital region, use with PI Traumatic 
Injury if a traumatic mechanism. 
Fever FEVR Fever 
1204 
1204-P 
For reported or tactile fever that is NOT 
suspected sepsis. For sepsis use PI Sepsis. 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 3 OF 6 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Genitourinary 
Disorder – 
Unspecified 
GUDO GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For urinary or genital related complaints, or 
for sexual assault, except NOT vaginal 
bleeding – use PI Vaginal Bleeding, NOT 
trauma-related – use PI Traumatic Injury. 
HazMat Exposure DCON HAZMAT 
1240 
1240-P 
For any hazardous material (chemical) 
exposure. May use with another PI (e.g., 
Inhalation Injury or Burns) when applicable. 
Headache – Non-
Traumatic 
HPNT General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For non-traumatic headache or head pain. 
Hyperglycemia HYPR 
Diabetic 
Emergencies 
1203 
1203-P 
For patients with primary concern for 
hyperglycemia and/or associated symptoms 
(blurred vision, frequent urination or thirst) 
without more specific PI and those requiring 
field treatment. DO NOT list for incidental 
finding of hyperglycemia related to another 
illness. 
Hypertension HYTN General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For patients with primary concern for 
hypertension without symptoms related to a 
more specific PI. For symptomatic patients, 
use related PI as primary (e.g., Headache – 
Non-traumatic) and Hypertension as 
secondary. DO NOT list for incidental finding 
of hypertension. 
Hyperthermia HEAT 
Hyperthermia 
(Environmental) 
1222 
1222-P 
For environmental exposure causing 
hyperthermia, e.g., heat exhaustion and heat 
stroke, drugs may also be a contributing 
factor. 
Hypoglycemia HYPO 
Diabetic 
Emergencies 
1203 
1203-P 
For glucose <60mg/dL. 
Hypotension HOTN 
Shock / 
Hypotension 
1207 
1207-P 
For SBP <90mmHg in adults or below 
normal for size per 1309 in children with 
transient low BP or rapidly responds to fluid 
resuscitation and without signs of shock. 
Hypothermia / Cold 
Injury 
COLD 
Hypothermia / Cold 
Injury 
1223 
1223-P 
For environmental exposures causing 
hypothermia and/or frostbite injury. 
Inhalation Injury INHL Inhalation Injury 
1236 
1236-P 
For any signs/symptoms related to inhaling a 
gas or substance other than smoke or 
carbon monoxide. 
Lower GI Bleeding LOGI GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For bleeding from the rectum and/or bright 
red bloody stools. 
Medical Device 
Malfunction – Fail 
FAIL 
Medical Device 
Malfunction 
1206 
1206-P 
For a medical device that fails, including 
VADs, insulin pumps, and shunts. Usually for 
internal devices, may be used for vent failure 
if patient is asymptomatic. For symptomatic 
patients, use PI related to symptoms (e.g., 
Automated Internal Defibrillator firing – use 
PI associated with complaint such as 
Cardiac Dysrhythmia – Tachycardia). 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 4 OF 6 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Nausea / Vomiting NAVM GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For any nausea or vomiting without blood. 
Not for adverse reaction to opiate 
administration by EMS, manage with primary 
PI/TP. 
Newborn BABY Newborn/Neonatal 1216-P For any newborn deliveries in the field. 
No Medical 
Complaint 
NOMC Assessment 1201 
For patients without any medical, psychiatric 
or traumatic complaint and no signs of illness 
on assessment. Usually reserved for non-
transports. 
Overdose/ 
Poisoning/Ingestion 
ODPO 
Overdose/ 
Poisoning/ Ingestion 
1241 
1241-P 
For any intentional or unintentional 
overdose/poisoning by any route, includes 
illicit substances and prescription 
medications, overdose and/or adverse 
reactions. 
Palpitations PALP General Medical 
1202 
1202-P 
For any patient complaint of palpitations 
(e.g., rapid heart rate beat, skipped beats, 
chest fluttering) with normal rate and rhythm 
on the ECG. 
Pregnancy 
Complications 
PREG 
Pregnancy 
Complication 
1217 
1217-P 
For any pregnancy-related condition that is 
not labor. Includes vaginal bleeding in 
pregnancy, hypertension, and complications 
of delivery. 
Pregnancy / Labor LABR Pregnancy Labor 
1218 
1218-P 
For contractions without imminent childbirth. 
Respiratory Arrest / 
Failure 
RARF Respiratory Distress 
1237 
1237-P 
For patients requiring positive-pressure 
ventilation and/or hypoxia despite 100% 
oxygen. 
Respiratory Distress / 
Bronchospasm 
SOBB Respiratory Distress 
1237 
1237-P 
For COPD/asthma exacerbations and any 
bronchospasms/wheezing not from 
pulmonary edema.  
Respiratory Distress / 
Other 
RDOT Respiratory Distress 
1237 
1237-P 
For patients with pulmonary disease that is 
not edema or bronchospasm, includes 
suspected pneumonia, PE, pneumothorax 
and non-pulmonary and unknown causes of 
respiratory distress. 
Respiratory Distress / 
Pulmonary Edema / 
CHF 
CHFF 
Pulmonary 
Edema / CHF 
1214 For congestive heart failure exacerbation. 
Seizure – Active  SEAC Seizure 
1231 
1231-P 
For seizure witnessed by EMS, whether 
treated or not. 
Seizure – Postictal SEPI Seizure 
1231 
1231-P 
For any seizure that stopped prior to EMS 
arrival and there is no further seizure activity 
during EMS contact. 
Sepsis SEPS Fever / Sepsis 
1204 
1204-P 
For patients with suspected sepsis (i.e., 
signs suggestive of sepsis including fever, 
tachycardia, suspected infection). 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 5 OF 6 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Severe Agitation 
with ALOC 
SAAL 
Behavioral/ 
Psychiatric Crisis 
1209 
1209-P 
Severe agitation with altered mental 
status due to suspected psychiatric and/or 
substance-related cause that prevents 
critical EMS clinical evaluation and/or 
treatment and endangers the patient, EMS 
clinicians and/or bystanders. 
NOT for anxiety/agitation secondary to 
medical etiology – use PI related to medical 
issue for medical agitation.  
Shock SHOK 
Shock / 
Hypotension 
1207 
1207-P 
For patients with poor perfusion not rapidly 
responsive to IV fluids. 
Smoke Inhalation SMOK Inhalation Injury 
1236 
1236-P 
For patients with smoke inhalation. 
Stings / Venomous 
Bites 
STNG 
Stings / Venomous 
Bites 
1224 
1224-P 
For snakes, scorpion, insects, and marine 
envenomations (stingrays, jelly fish). NOT for 
animal bites, use PI traumatic injury. 
Stroke / CVA / TIA STRK Stroke / CVA / TIA 
1232 
1232-P 
For suspected stroke or transient ischemic 
attack (stroke symptoms that resolve 
rapidly). 
Submersion / 
Drowning 
DRWN Submersion 
1225 
1225-P 
For any submersion injury, including 
drowning and dive (decompression) 
emergencies. 
Syncope / Near 
Syncope 
SYNC 
Syncope / Near 
Syncope 
1233 
1233-P 
For syncope (transient loss of 
consciousness). NOT for cardiac arrest, use 
PI Cardiac Arrest – Non-traumatic only. 
Traumatic Arrest – 
Blunt 
CABT Traumatic Arrest 
1243 
1243-P 
For cardiac arrest with blunt traumatic 
mechanism, including those declared 
deceased in the field by Ref. 814. NOT for 
trauma sustained after cardiac arrest, use PI 
Cardiac Arrest – Non- traumatic. 
Traumatic Arrest – 
Penetrating 
CAPT Traumatic Arrest 
1243 
1243-P 
For cardiac arrest with penetrating traumatic 
mechanism, including those declared 
deceased in the field by Ref. 814. 
Traumatic Injury TRMA Traumatic Injury 
1242 
1242-P 
1244 
1244-P 
For any trauma-related injury including crush 
injury and conducted electrical weapons 
(CEW). May use in addition to another PI 
when medical condition also present (e.g., 
for syncope with trauma – use PI Syncope 
and PI Traumatic Injury; for CEW use in 
patient with agitation – use PI Behavioral/ 
Psychiatric Crisis or PI Severe Agitation with 
ALOC as appropriate, and also PI Traumatic 
Injury). 
Upper GI Bleeding UPGI GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For vomiting blood or coffee ground emesis, 
and for melena (i.e., black, tarry stools). 
Vaginal Bleeding VABL GI/GU Emergencies 
1205 
1205-P 
For vaginal bleeding in the NON-pregnant 
patient. For vaginal bleeding in pregnancy 
use PI Pregnancy Complications. 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: PROVIDER IMPRESSIONS Ref. No. 1200.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED: 07-01-25 PAGE 6 OF 6 
Provider Impression 
(PI) Name 
PI Code 
Treatment 
Protocol (TP) 
TP 
Code 
Guidelines for use of PI 
Weakness – General WEAK General Weakness 
1202 
1202-P 
For nonfocal weakness, general malaise, 
and any nonspecific ‘sick’ symptoms.
