# 1179054 622.5

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
SUBJECT: CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.5 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-16 PAGE 1   OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
Dat
a Request Tracking Number (To be completed by the EMS Agency):  ___________________ 
Dat
a Recipient (name) :      
This
 Confidentiality Agreement must be completed by any person or entity (which may include but not 
limited to, research assistants) to whom the Data Recipient provides the Limited Data Set Information. 
The  federal  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act  (“HIPAA”)  and  its  regulations,  the  
California  Confidentiality  of  Medical  Information  Act  ("CMIA") and  other  federal  and  State  laws  and  
regulations were established to protect the confidentiality of medical and personal information. These 
laws generally provide that patient information may not be disclosed, except as permitted or required by 
law, or unless authorized by the patient.  
The unders
igned understands and agrees to the following: 
1.I  may  be  working  with  confidential  medical  and  other  sensitive  or  private  information.  This
information may include, but is not limited to, medical records, personnel information, ledgers,
verbal discussions, and electronic communications,  including e-mail.
2.HIPAA  requires  that  I  obtain  training  on  the  requirements  of  HIPAA.      I  will obtain  all  required
training before I access, use, or disclose any confidential patient information.
3.It  is my  responsibility  to  respect  the  privacy  and  confidentiality  of  patient  data and  other
confidential  information.  I  will  not  access,  use,   or  disclose  patient  data or  other  confidential
information unless I do so in the course and scope of fulfilling my duties with the Data Recipient.
I  am  required  to  immediately  report  any  information  about  unauthorized  access,  use, or
disclosure  of  confidential  patient  information  to  the  Data  Recipient  and  the LA  County  EMS
Agency.
4.If I breach any provision of this Agreement, I may be subject to civil or criminal liability concerning
access, use,  and disclosure of such information.
5.The limited  data  set  was  created  using  protected  health  information  and  requires  that  certain
individual  identifiers  including  names,  all  addresses,  and  all  unique  identifying  numbers  have
been removed.
6.I may not use or further disclose the limited data set or any of its contents for purposes  or to
persons other than for the purpose and to the person(s) indicated by the Intended Use of the
Limited Data Set (622.3) for the current proposal as specified. I will use appropriate safeguards
to prevent use or disclosure of the information other than as provided for in this Agreement. I will
report  to  the  Data  Recipient  and  to  the  LA  County  EMS  Agency  any  use  or  disclosure  of  the
information not provided for in this Agreement. I will not attempt to identify or contact the subjects
of the information.
_______________________________ 
(Signature) 
_______________________________ 
(
Print Name) 

SUBJECT: CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT REFERENCE NO. 622.5 
PAGE 2
 OF 2 
_______________________________ 
(Date)
