# 1179857 823.1aSOC341GeneralInstructions

California Health & Human Services Agency 
California Department of Social Serv
ices
REFERENCE NO. 823.1a 
SOC 341 (2/24) Page 1 of 4 
REPORT OF SUSPECTED DEPENDENT ADULT/ELDER ABUSE 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 
PURPOSE OF FORM 
This form, as adopted by the California Department of Social Services (CDSS), is required under 
Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC) Sections 15630 and 15658(a)(1). This form documents the 
information given by the reporting party on the suspected incident of abuse or neglect of an elder 
or dependent adult. Abuse means any treatment with resulting physical harm, pain, or mental 
suffering or the deprivation by a care custodian of goods or services that are necessary to avoid 
physical harm or mental suffering. Neglect means the negligent failure of an elder or dependent 
adult or of any person having the care or custody of an elder or a dependent adult to exercise that 
degree of self-care or care that a reasonable person in a like position would exercise. For purposes 
of mandatory reporting, elder means any person residing in this state who is 60 years of age or 
older (WIC Section 15610.27). Dependent Adult means any person residing in this state, between 
the ages of 18 and 59, who has physical or mental limitations that restrict his or her ability to carry 
out normal activities or to protect his or her rights including, but not limited to, persons who have 
physical or developmental disabilities or whose physical or mental abilities have diminished because 
of age (WIC Section 15610.23). Dependent adult includes any person between the ages of 18 and 
59 who is admitted as an inpatient to a 24-hour health facility (defined in the Health and Safety 
Code Sections 1250, 1250.2, and 1250.3). Adults age 60+, however, are eligible for Adult Protective 
Services (APS). APS can investigate allegations of abuse against them, and if confirmed, offer 
appropriate services. 
COMPLETION OF THE FORM 
1.This form may be used by the receiving agency to record information through a telephone report
of suspected dependent adult/elder abuse.
2.If   any item of information is unknown, enter “unknown.”
3.Item A: Check box to indicate if the victim waives confidentiality.
4.Item D: Check box if the reporting party waives confidentiality. Please note that mandated
reporters are required to disclose their names, however, non-mandated reporters may report
anonymously.
REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND TIME FRAMES: 
Any mandated reporter, who in his or her professional capacity, or within the scope of his or her 
employment, has observed or has knowledge of an incident that reasonably appears to be abuse 
or neglect, or is told by an elder or dependent adult that he or she has experienced behavior 
constituting abuse or neglect, or reasonably suspects that abuse or neglect has occurred, shall 
complete this form for each report of known or suspected instance of abuse (physical abuse, sexual 
abuse, financial abuse, abduction, neglect (self-neglect), isolation, and abandonment) involving an 
elder or dependent adult immediately or as soon as practicably possible. 
*Serious bodily injury means an injury involving extreme physical pain, substantial risk of death, or
protracted loss or impairment of function of a bodily member, organ or of mental faculty, or requiring
medical intervention, including, but not limited to, hospitalization, surgery, or physical rehabilitation
(WIC Section 15610.67).
EFFECTIVE 06-01-00
REVISED 04-01-25
SUPERCEDES: 07-01-24

California Health & Human Services Agency California Department of Social Services 
SOC 341 (2/24) Page 2 of 4 
Reporting shall be completed as follows: 
•If the abuse occurred in a LTC facility, was physical abuse, did not result in serious bodily injury,
and was perpetrated by a resident with a physician’s diagnosis of dementia, the reporter shall
submit a written report to both the LTCOP and the local law enforcement agency within 24 hours
of observing, obtaining knowledge of, or suspecting physical abuse.
•In all other instances of abuse that occurred in a Long-Term Care (LTC) facility (as defined in
WIC Section 15610.47) a verbal report shall be made by telephone to the local law enforcement
agency immediately and no later than two (2) hours after observing, obtaining knowledge of,
or suspecting physical abuse. Send the written report to the local law enforcement agency, the
local Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program (LTCOP), and the appropriate licensing agency (for
long-term health care facilities, the California Department of Public Health; for community care
facilities, the California Department of Social Services) within twenty-four (24) hours of observing,
obtaining knowledge of, or suspecting physical abuse.
•If the abuse or neglect occurred in a state mental hospital or a state developmental center,
mandated reporters shall report immediately, but no later than two (2) hours after observing,
obtaining knowledge of, or suspecting physical abuse to the responsible agency as identified
below:
•If the abuse occurred in a State Mental Hospital, report to the local law enforcement agency
and the California Department of State Hospitals.
•If the abuse occurred in a State Developmental Center, report to the local law enforcement
agency and to the California Department of Developmental Services.
•For all other abuse, mandated reporters shall report by telephone or through a confidential
Internet reporting tool to the adult protective services agency or the local law enforcement agency
immediately or as soon as practicably possible. If reported by telephone, a written or confidential
Internet report shall be sent to adult protective services or law enforcement within two working
days.
RE
PORTING PARTY DEFINITIONS 
Mandated Reporter (WIC Section 15630 (a)) Any person who has assumed full or intermittent 
responsibility for care or custody of an elder or dependent adult, whether or not that person receives 
compensation, including administrators, supervisors, and any licensed staff of a public or private 
facility that provides care or services for elder or dependent adults, or any elder or dependent adult 
care custodian, health practitioner, clergy member, or employee of a county adult protective services 
agency or a local law enforcement agency, is a mandated reporter. 
Care Custodian (WIC Section 15610.17) means an administrator or an employee of any of the 
following public or private facilities or agencies, or persons providing care or services for elders or 
dependent adults, including members of the support staff and maintenance staff: (a) Twenty-four 
hour health facilities, as defined in Sections 1250, 1250.2, and 1250.3 of the Health and Safety
 
Code; (b) Clinics; (c) Home health agencies; (d) Agencies providing publicly funded in-home 
supportive services, nutrition services, or other home and community-based support services; (e) 
Adult day health care centers and adult day care; (f) Secondary schools that serve 18- to 22-year-old 
dependent adults and postsecondary educational institutions that serve dependent adults or elders; 

California Health & Human Services Agency California Department of Social Services 
SOC 341 (2/24) Page 3 of 4 
(g) Independent living centers; (h) Camps; (i) Alzheimer’s Disease Day Care Resource Centers; (j)
Community care facilities, as defined in Section 1502 of the Health and Safety Code, and residential
care facilities for the elderly, as defined in Section 1569.2 of the Health and Safety Code; (k) Respite
care facilities; (l) Foster homes; (m) Vocational rehabilitation facilities and work activity centers; (n)
Designated area agencies on aging; (o) Regional centers for persons with developmental disabilities;
(p)State Department of Social Services and State Department of Health Services licensing divisions;
(q) County welfare departments; (r) Offices of patients’ rights advocates and clients’ rights advocates,
including attorneys; (s) The Office of the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman; (t) Offices of public
conservators, public guardians, and court investigators; (u) Any protection or advocacy agency or
entity that is designated by the Governor to fulfill the requirements and assurances of the following:
(1) The federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000, contained in
Chapter 144 (commencing with Section 15001) of Title 42 of the United States Code, for protection
and advocacy of the rights of persons with developmental disabilities; or (2) The Protection and
Advocacy for the Mentally Ill Individuals Act of 1986, as amended, contained in Chapter 114
(commencing with Section 10801) of Title 42 of the United States Code, for the protection and
advocacy of the rights of persons with mental illness; (v) Humane societies and animal control
agencies; (w) Fire departments; (x) Offices of environmental health and building code enforcement;
or (y) Any other protective, public, sectarian, mental health, or private assistance or advocacy
agency or person providing health services or social services to elders or dependent adults.
Health Practitioner (WIC Section 15610.37) means a physician and surgeon, psychiatrist, 
psychologist, dentist, resident, intern, podiatrist, chiropractor, licensed nurse, dental hygienist, 
licensed clinical social worker or associate clinical social worker, marriage, family, and child 
counselor, or any other person who is currently licensed under Division 2 (commencing with Section 
500) of the Business and Professions Code, any emergency medical technician I or II,  paramedic,
or person certified pursuant to Division 2.5 (commencing with Section 1797) of the Health and
Safety Code, a psychological assistant registered pursuant to Section 2913 of the Business and
Professions Code, a marriage, family, and child counselor trainee, as defined in subdivision (c) of
Section 4980.03 of the Business and Professions Code, or an unlicensed marriage, family, and child
counselor intern registered under Section 4980.44 of the Business and Professions Code, state or
county public health or social service employee who treats an elder or a dependent adult for any
condition, or a coroner.
Any officer and/or employee of a financial institution is a mandated reporter of suspected financial 
abuse and shall report suspected financial abuse of an elder or dependent adult on form SOC 342, 
“Report of Suspected Dependent Adult/Elder Financial Abuse”. 
MULTIPLE REPORTERS 
When two or more mandated reporters are jointly knowledgeable of a suspected instance of abuse 
of a dependent adult or elder, and when there is agreement among them, the telephone report
 
may be made by one member of the group. Also, a single written report may be completed by that 
member of the group. Any person of that group, who believes the report was not submitted, shall 
submit the report. 
IDENTITY OF THE REPORTER 
The identity of all persons who report under WIC Chapter 11 shall be confidential and disclosed 
only among APS agencies, local law enforcement agencies, LTCOPs, California State Attorney 

California Health & Human Services Agency California Department of Social Services 
SOC 341 (2/24) Page 4 of 4 
General Bureau of Medi-Cal Fraud and Elder Abuse, licensing agencies or their counsel, Department 
of Consumer Affairs Investigators (who investigate elder and dependent adult abuse), the county 
District Attorney, the Probate Court, and the Public Guardian. Confidentiality may be waived by the 
reporter or by court order. 
FAILURE TO REPORT 
Failure to report by mandated reporters (as defined under “Reporting Party Definitions”) any 
suspected incidents of physical abuse (including sexual abuse), abandonment, isolation, financial 
abuse, abduction, or neglect (including self-neglect) of an elder (age 65 or older) or a dependent 
adult is a misdemeanor, punishable by not more than six months in the county jail, or by a fine of 
not more than $1,000, or by both imprisonment and fine. Any mandated reporter who willfully fails to 
report abuse of an elder (age 65 or older) or a dependent adult, where the abuse results in death or 
great bodily injury, may be punished by up to one year in the county jail, or by a fine of up to $5,000, 
or by both imprisonment and fine (WIC Section 15630(h)). 
No one, including a supervisor, employer, or lawyer, can excuse a mandated reporter from his or her 
personal legal duty to report known or suspected abuse. Anyone who attempts to impede or inhibit 
a mandated reporter from reporting may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor punishable by a fine, 
imprisonment, or both. Mandated reporters are therefore expected to report any such efforts to law 
enforcement, as well as any other responsible agency (see Welfare and Institutions Code Section 
15630(f) and (h)). 
Officers or employees of financial institutions are mandated reporters of financial abuse (effective 
January 1, 2007). These mandated reporters who fail to report financial abuse of an elder or 
dependent adult are subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000. Individuals who willfully fail to 
report financial abuse of an elder or dependent adult are subject to a civil penalty not exceeding 
$5,000. These civil penalties shall be paid by the financial institution, which is the employer of the 
mandated reporter, to the party bringing the action. 
ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES ELIGIBILITY 
For purposes of eligibility to receive services under the APS program, an elder is defined as anyone 
residing in this state 60 years of age or older. (WIC Section 15750(b)(2)). As of January 1, 2022, 
APS agencies can receive referrals and investigate allegations of abuse and provide intervention 
and case management to any elder 60 years of age or older, and to dependent adults between the 
ages of 18-59 (WIC Section 15750(b)(1)(A)). Statutes governing mandated reporting have not been 
affected; accordingly, mandatory reporting still only applies to elders age 65 years and older. 
D
ISTRIBUTION OF SOC 341 COPIES 
Mandated reporter: After making the telephone report to the appropriate agency or agencies, the 
reporter shall send the written report to the designated agencies (as defined under “Reporting 
Responsibilities and Time Frames”); and keep one copy for the reporter’s file. 
Receiving agency: Place the original copy in the case file. Send a copy to a cross-reporting agency, 
if applicable. 
DO NOT SEND A    COPY TO THE CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES ADULT 
PROGRAMS DIVISION.
