# 1180437 519.5MCIFieldDecontaminationGuidelines

Triage Patient as Immediate 
No 
Yes 
Threatening Condition 
Assess for Life 
 
 
 
Collect Belongings & 
Preserve Evidence 
 
Decontaminate Patient 
Triage patient according to Ref. 
No. 519.2 
Triage Patient according to 
Ref. No. 519.2 
Collect Belongings & 
Preserves Evidence 
Remove Clothing 
Decontamination Triage, 
determine the priority for 
decontamination 
ADMINISTER 
Life Saving Treatment and/or 
Medications 
Decontaminate Patient 
Collect Belongings & Preserves 
Evidence 
Remove Clothing 
Determine Priority 
Remove Clothing 
CONSIDER 
Life Saving Treatment and/or 
Medications in Conjunction with 
Decontamination 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: MCI FIELD DECONTAMINATION GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 519.5 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The need for decontamination should not delay the provision of time critical medication and treatment 
(i.e., Mark 1 antidote). 
 
2. Patients shall not be transported to the receiving facility if hazardous chemical contamination is present. 
 
3. Do not delay treatment or transport of patients contaminated with radiation, who also have a life-threatening injury or 
medical condition. Contamination mitigation efforts and decontamination should be done, only if they do not delay 
treatment or transport. 
 
4. If the incident involves chemical contamination and treatment is required, the provider shall contact the base hospital 
or Medical Alert Center (MAC). Treatment should be based on the appropriate treatment protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T R A N S P O R T  TO  THE  A PPR OP R I A T E  T R E A T M E N T  AREA  
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-07 
REVISED: 04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL CONTAMINATION 
Chemical 
Contamination 
Radioactive 
Contamination 
Use Appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
Contact Hazmat Resources 
Secure Area 
Establish Incident Site According To Provider Agency Protocol 
Implement Rapid Extraction 
Consider Gross Decontamination 
Yes 
Triage Patient as Immediate
