# 1180427 519.3MCITransportManagement

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT (EMT, PARAMEDIC, DISPATCH) 
 TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT REFERENCE NO. 519.3 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-06  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the rapid and efficient dispatch of ambulances in 
response to multiple casualty incidents (MCI). 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Chapter 3, Article 4 
 Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Chapter 4, Article 1, Section 1797.220 
 9-1-1 Emergency Ambulance Transportation Services Agreement 
 
DEFINITIONS (For additional definitions refer to Reference 519.1, MCI - Definitions.): 
 
Ambulance Strike Team (AST): A pre-established set of 5 ambulances and 1 supervisor which 
meets the guidelines established by the State EMS Authority. 
 
Central Dispatch Office (CDO): Dispatch office for the Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
Department of Health Services ambulances. 
 
Exclusive Operating Area (EOA) Contractor: Private Ambulance Company that is contracted 
with the Department of Health Services to provide emergency patient transportation within the 
established areas of the County where emergency transportation is not provided by the 
jurisdictional 9-1-1 provider. 
 
Level I Response: An MCI in which the number of ambulances required for the incident is 10 or 
less.  
 
Level II Response: An MCI in which the number of ambulances required for the incident 
exceeds the number of ambulances available through the 9-1-1 provider, or is greater than 10. 
 
Medical Alert Center (MAC): Centralized communication center through which the Medical and 
the Health Operational Area Coordinator (MHOAC) and the Regional Disaster Medical and 
Health Coordinator (RDMHC) for Region I may be contacted. 
 
Operational Area (OA): Political subdivisions within a county’s geographical area that provides 
coordination and communication between local jurisdictions and State Office of Emergency 
Services (OES) Regions. 
 
Regional Disaster Medical and Health Coordinator (RDMHC): Designated individual 
responsible for coordinating disaster medical and health operations for Mutual Aid Region I. The 
EMS Agency administrator is the designated RDMHC and is contacted through the MAC. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Upon notification by a jurisdictional dispatch center, the Fire Operational Area 
Coordinator (FOAC) is responsible for coordinating the dispatch of ten or more 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT 
 TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT REFERENCE NO. 519.3 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
ambulances to an MCI within Los Angeles County. Los Angeles County Fire Department 
Dispatch performs the FOAC function for the County. 
 
2. EOA contractors shall establish mutual aid agreements with licensed ambulance 
companies to provide backup emergency ambulance transportation. 
 
3. Jurisdictional 9-1-1 providers with transport capabilities will follow their established 
operational response policies related to mutual aid agreements with other 9-1-1 
providers with transport capabilities. 
 
4. Response Time frames: 
 
a. Level I – Immediate, with first ambulance arrival on scene within 8 minutes and 
59 seconds. 
 
b. Level II – Tiered response, with first ambulance arrival on scene within 30 to 60 
minutes. 
 
5. All ambulance requests require the following information: 
 
a. Requesting agency, contact name, position, phone/e-mail; 
 
b. Field Command Agency Representative, name or identifier; 
 
c. Type of incident- mission/tasks; 
 
d. Reporting location/person to report to; 
 
e. Expected duration of operations; 
 
f. Number/type of ambulances requested (ALS/BLS/CCT); 
 
g. Potential hazards encountered at scene;  
 
h. Radio channel/frequency/phone # for ambulance coordinator; and 
 
i. Other special instructions (may include an order number). 
 
6. Private ambulance providers shall not respond to an MCI unless specifically requested 
by the jurisdictional provider or incident commander. 
 
7. Although the jurisdictional 9-1-1 provider may be able to provide the required number of 
ambulances as specifically defined in the levels of response, jurisdictional 9-1-1 
providers may utilize the FOAC to request additional ambulance resources as needed. 
 
8. Educational sessions and/or drills regarding the communication and coordination 
involving the FOAC, CDO, and EOA contractors should be conducted on a routine basis. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Level I Response – Up to 10 ambulances required. 
 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT 
 TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT REFERENCE NO. 519.3 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
The Jurisdictional 9-1-1 Dispatch Center (JDC) shall request ambulances from the EOA 
contractor in which the incident is located, or 9-1-1 providers with transport capabilities 
will follow their established operational response policy. Contracted backup providers 
may be utilized as needed. 
 
When responding to the incident, the EOA Contractor shall identify an Ambulance 
Supervisor who will liaison with the scene Ambulance Coordinator. 
 
II. Level II Response – Greater than 10 ambulances required. 
 
A. Jurisdictional 9-1-1 Dispatch Center shall notify the FOAC (LA County Fire 
Dispatch) of: 
 
1. the MCI; 
 
2. the number of ambulances already responding; 
 
3. additional number of ambulances requested by the Incident Commander; 
and 
 
4. Other known incident information. 
 
B. The FOAC shall coordinate a conference call with: 
 
1. The EOA contracted providers; 
 
2. CDO (who will notify the Los Angeles County EMS Agency Administrator 
on Duty); and 
 
3. Other agencies as determined. 
 
C. Conference call participants shall: 
 
1. Provide the FOAC with the number/type of ambulances that will be 
available within 30 to 60 minutes. 
 
2. Provide the FOAC with the number of units responding, unit identifier, and 
the estimated time of arrival (ETA). 
 
3. If necessary, contact the licensed backup ambulance companies pre-
assigned to the contractor if additional ambulances are needed to 
respond to the MCI. 
 
4. The EMS Agency Administrator on Duty (AOD) will determine which, if 
any, EMS Agency resources will be dispatched to the incident. 
 
5. If sufficient EMS resources are not available within Los Angeles County, 
the EMS AOD will activate the regional resource request process, using 
MHOAC and RDMHC procedures. 
 
D. The MAC shall contact the EMS Agency AOD, and the RDMHC. 
 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT 
 TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT REFERENCE NO. 519.3 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
E. The RDMHC shall: 
 
1. Assess the incident and anticipate possible ambulance resource 
requirements from outside of the OA. 
 
2. Notify the MHOACs of incident progression and de-escalation as 
appropriate. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 519.1  Multiple Casualty Incident - Definitions
