# 1180413 519.1MCIDefinitions

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT – DEFINITIONS REFERENCE NO. 519.1 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-01-07 PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Decontamination (Decon): The physical and/or chemical process of removing or reducing 
contamination from personnel or equipment, or in some other way preventing the spread of 
contamination by persons and equipment. 
 
Fire Operational Area Coordinator (FOAC): Los Angeles County Fire Department, which is 
contacted through its Dispatch Center. 
 
Hazardous Material: Any solid, liquid, gas, or mixture thereof that can potentially cause harm to 
the human body through respiration, ingestion, skin absorption, or contact and may pose a 
substantial threat to life, the environment, or to property. 
 
Hospital Emergency Response Team (HERT): An organized group of health care providers 
from a designated Level I Trauma Center, with Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency 
approval as a HERT provider, who are available 24 hours/day to respond and provide a higher 
level of on-scene surgical and medical expertise. 
 
Incident Command Post (ICP): Location at which the primary command functions are 
executed and usually coordinated with the incident base. 
 
Incident Command System (ICS): A management system utilized to rapidly and efficiently 
manage the scene of any type of a large incident. This includes a combination of facilities, 
equipment, personnel, procedures, and communications operating within a common 
organizational structure with responsibility for the management of assigned resources to 
effectively accomplish stated objectives pertaining to an incident. 
 
ICS Components (five major management functions): 
 
1. Incident Command: Sets the incident objectives, strategies, and priorities and 
has overall responsibility at the incident or event. 
 
2. Operations Section: Conducts tactical operations to carry out the plan. 
Develops tactical objectives and organization, and directs all tactical resources. 
 
3. Planning Section: Prepares and documents the Incident Action Plan to 
accomplish the objectives, collects and evaluates information, maintains 
resource status, and maintains documentation for incident records. 
 
4. Logistics Section: Provides support, resources, and all other services needed 
to meet the operational objectives. 
 
5. Finance/Administration Section: Monitors costs related to the incident. 
Provides accounting, procurement, time recording, and cost analysis. 
 
Jump START: A pediatric MCI field triage tool developed to parallel the START triage system, 
which adequately addresses the unique anatomy and physiology of children. 
 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT – DEFINITIONS REFERENCE NO. 519.1 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
Medical Alert Center (MAC): Assists provider agencies and base hospitals with patient 
destination decisions and multiple casualty incidents.  It serves as the control point for VMED28 
and ReddiNet® systems. 
 
Medical and Health Operational Area Coordinator (MHOAC): Responsible for all medical 
and health operations for the operational area. The EMS Agency administrator is the designated 
MHOAC and is contacted through the MAC. 
 
Medical Officer on Duty (MOD): Designated medical officer on duty for the MAC. 
 
Multiple Casualty Incident (MCI): The combination of numbers of ill/injured patients and the 
type of injuries going beyond the capability of an entity’s normal first response. 
 
National Incident Management System (NIMS): A comprehensive, national approach to 
incident management that is applicable at all jurisdictional levels and across functional 
disciplines. The intent of NIMS is to be applicable across a full spectrum of potential incidents 
and hazard scenarios, regardless of size or complexity. The management system serves to 
improve coordination and cooperation between public and private entities in a variety of 
domestic incident management activities. 
 
Rapid Emergency Digital Data Information Network (ReddiNet): An emergency medical 
communications network linking hospitals, regional EMS agencies, paramedics, dispatch 
centers, law enforcement, public health officials, and other healthcare systems. The system 
provides participants with tools for managing MCIs, determining hospital bed availability, 
assessing available healthcare system resources, communicating emergency department 
diversion status, participating in syndromic surveillance, and sending the network messages. 
 
Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment (START): A triage system that provides guidelines for 
prehospital care personnel to rapidly classify victims so that patient treatment and transport are 
not delayed. Patients are triaged into the following categories: 
 
Deceased: Patients who do not have spontaneous respirations after repositioning the 
airway. 
 
Immediate: Patients who exhibit severe respiratory, circulatory, or neurological 
symptoms. Patients who require rapid assessment and medical intervention 
for survival. 
 
Delayed: Patients who are neither immediate nor minor but will require a gurney 
upon arrival at the hospital. Delayed patients are the second priority in 
patient treatment. These patients require aid but injuries are less severe. 
 
Minor: Patients who are ambulatory with injuries requiring simple, rudimentary 
first-aid. 
 
Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS): A system required by Government 
Code 806 (a), for managing responses to multi-agency and multi-jurisdictional emergencies in 
California. SEMS consists of five organizational levels which are activated as necessary: (1) 
field response; (2) local government; (3) operational area; (4) regional; and (5) state. 
 
Staging Area: The location where incident personnel and equipment are assigned on a three-
minute available status. 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT – DEFINITIONS REFERENCE NO. 519.1 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
 
Triage: A system that provides guidelines for prehospital care personnel to rapidly classify 
victims so that patient treatment and transport are not delayed (see Ref. Nos. 519.2, 519.4 and 
519.5). 
 
Triage Tag: A tag used by triage personnel to identify and document the patient’s triage 
category. 
 
Unified Command: A team effort that allows all agencies with jurisdictional responsibility for the 
incident, either geographical or functional, to manage an incident by establishing a common set 
of incident objectives and strategies. This is accomplished without losing or abdicating agency 
authority, responsibility, or accountability. 
 
VMED28: The radio frequency is the designated MCI communication system for paramedic 
providers to contact the MAC. 
 
Key Incident Command System Positions: 
 
Air Operations Branch Coordinator: Is ground based and is primarily responsible for 
preparing the air operations portion of the Incident Action Plan and providing logistical support 
to helicopters operating on the incident. 
 
Ambulance Coordinator: Reports to the Patient Transportation Unit Leader with responsibility 
to manage the ambulance staging area(s) and to dispatch additional ambulances/transportation 
resources as needed. Essential duties include establishment of appropriate staging area for 
ambulances; identify routes of travel for ambulances; and maintain communications with the Air 
Operations Branch Director regarding air ambulance transportation assignments. The position is 
to maintain communications with the Medical Communications Coordinator and Patient Loading 
Coordinator and to provide ambulances upon request. The Ambulance Coordinator is to assure 
that necessary equipment is available in the ambulance for patient needs during transportation, 
provide an inventory of medical supplies available at ambulance staging area for use at the 
scene, and maintain records as required and Unit/Activity Log (ICS Form 214). 
 
Delayed Treatment Area Manager: Responsible for the treatment and re-triage of patients 
assigned to the Delayed Treatment Area and requesting Medical Teams as necessary. This 
position assigns treatment personnel to patients received in the Delayed Treatment Area, 
ensures treatment of patients triaged to the Delayed Treatment Area, ensures that patients are 
prioritized for transportation, and coordinates transportation of patients with Patient Loading 
Coordinator. 
 
Helicopter Coordinator (Helco): Is often the senior provider agency pilot on scene who is 
responsible for the overall air traffic control of the incident. This position is responsible for 
maintaining a position in the air that allows direct visual and radio communications with all 
helicopters both public and private. Essential duties include establishing arrival and departure 
routes, communicating with Fire, Law Enforcement and News Media helicopters, and 
coordinating traffic with the Air Operations Branch Director. 
 
Helispot Manager: Located on the ground, reports to the Helibase Manager. Essential 
functions include maintaining communications with the Air Operations Branch Director regarding 
air ambulance transportation assignments. The Helispot Manager is to establish and maintain 
communications with the Medical Communications Coordinator, the Patient Loading 
Coordinator, and to provide air ambulances upon request from the Medical Communications 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT – DEFINITIONS REFERENCE NO. 519.1 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
Coordinator. The position is responsible for providing safe and efficient management of air 
ambulances for patient needs during transportation. The Coordinator is responsible to maintain 
records as required and Unit/Activity Log (ICS Form 214). 
 
Immediate Treatment Area Manager: Responsible for treatment and re-triage of patients 
assigned to the Immediate Treatment Area. This position requests medical teams as necessary, 
assigns treatment personnel to patients, assures that patients are prioritized for transportation, 
and coordinates transportation of patients with the Patient Loading Coordinator. This position is 
responsible for identifying immediate patients who exhibit severe respiratory, circulatory, or 
neurological symptoms and who meet one or more categories of Trauma Center Criteria. These 
patients require rapid assessment, medical intervention, and transport to a 9-1-1 receiving, 
Trauma Center or other specialty center whenever system resources allow. 
 
Litter Bearer: Personnel assigned by the Triage Unit Leader who are responsible for the 
transport of patients to the appropriate treatment areas. 
 
Litter Bearer Manager: Position assigned by Triage Unit Leader, the Litter Bearer Manager is 
responsible for the management of personnel assigned to transport triaged patients to the 
appropriate treatment areas. 
 
Medical Communications Coordinator (Med Com): Establishes communications with the 
Medical Alert Center or designated base hospital to obtain status of available hospital beds. The 
Med Com assigns appropriate patient destinations based on available resources. This position 
receives basic patient information and condition from Patient Loading Coordinator and provides 
the Medical Alert Center or base hospital with information on the assigned patient destinations 
and transporting ambulance unit. 
 
Medical Group/Division Supervisor: Supervises the Triage Unit Leader, Treatment Unit 
Leader, Patient Transportation Unit Leader and Medical Supply Coordinator, and establishes 
command and control within a medical group. This position determines the amount and types of 
additional medical resources and supplies needed to handle the incident (medical caches, 
backboards, litters, and cots), ensures activation or notification of hospital alert system, local 
EMS/health agencies, and maintains Unit/Activity Log. 
 
Minor Treatment Area Manager: Responsible for the treatment and re-triage of patients 
assigned to the Minor Treatment Area and requests medical teams as necessary. This position 
assigns treatment personnel to patients received in the Minor Treatment Area, ensures 
treatment of patients triaged to the Minor Treatment Area, ensures that patients are prioritized 
for transportation, and coordinates transportation of patients with Patient Loading Coordinator. 
 
Patient Loading Coordinator: Responsible for coordinating with the Patient Transportation 
Unit Leader (or Group Supervisor if established) the transportation of patients out of the 
Treatment Areas. This position establishes communications with the Immediate, Delayed, Minor 
Treatment Area Managers, and the Patient Transportation Unit Leader (or Group Supervisor if 
established). The position verifies that patients are prioritized for transportation and advises 
Medical Communications Coordinator of patient readiness and priority for transport. This 
position coordinates transportation of patients with Medical Communications Coordinator and 
coordinates ambulance loading with the Treatment Managers and ambulance personnel. 
 
Patient Transportation Unit Leader: Supervises the Medical Communications Coordinator 
and the Ambulance Coordinator. The Patient Transportation Unit Leader is responsible for the 
coordination of patient transportation and maintenance of records relating to the patient’s 

SUBJECT: MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT – DEFINITIONS REFERENCE NO. 519.1 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
identification, condition, and destination. This position designates the Ambulance Staging 
Area(s), ensures that patient information and destination are recorded, notifies Ambulance 
Coordinator of ambulance requests, and coordinates requests for air ambulance transportation 
through the Helispot Manager. 
 
Triage Personnel: Reports to the Triage Unit Leader, triage patients, tag patients, and assign 
them to appropriate treatment areas. Triage personnel direct the movement of patients to proper 
treatment areas and provide appropriate medical treatment to patients prior to movement as 
incident conditions allow. 
 
Triage Unit Leader: Supervises Triage Personnel, Litter Bearers, Litter Bearer Manager, and 
the Morgue Manager. The Triage Unit Leader assumes responsibility for providing triage 
management and movement of patients from the triage area. This position implements the 
triage process, coordinates movement of patients from the triage area to the appropriate 
treatment area, and maintains security and control of the triage area. 
 
Treatment Unit Leader: Assumes responsibility for treatment, preparation for patient transport, 
and directs movement of patients to loading location(s). This position establishes 
communications and coordination with Patient Transportation Unit Leader and ensures 
continual triage of patients throughout Treatment Areas. This position directs movement of 
patients to ambulance loading area(s) and gives periodic status reports to the Medical Group 
Supervisor.
