# 1187315 1306.2DispositionGuidanceforPatientsatRiskofSuicide

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 07-01-25                                                                                   PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
Medical Control Guideline: DISPOSITION GUIDANCE FOR PATIENTS          Ref. No. 1306.2 
                                   AT RISK OF SUICIDE                                                                                                                 
 
Determination of patient disposition shall consider all information obtained during the field evaluation and 
should not rely solely on the results of a suicide risk screening, including: the patient’s medical and 
behavioral or psychiatric condition, information from key third parties, as well as any mental health 
evaluation performed by an LPS-Evaluator, if applicable.  
 
In general, patients will be transported to the MAR or PUCC when EMS is called to respond either on a 
voluntary basis or on a 5150 / 5585 hold.  For low risk patients with decision-making capacity refusing 
transport against medical advice, or in situations involving disagreement between different responders or 
agencies, standardized suicide risk screening is a useful tool to facilitate communication between EMS, 
LE and the Base Hospital. 
 
      
EMS Encounters Patient with Possible Risk of Suicide 
• Evaluate for medical conditions (manage per TP, when applicable) 
• Evaluate and treat for primary psychiatric crises (TP 1209 / 1209-P) 
• Establish rapport, perform evaluation and assess risk for suicide   
Patient agrees 
to voluntary 
transport? 
Patient agrees 
to voluntary 
transport? 
LPS-evaluation: 
Pt meets 5150 
criteria? 
Patient has 
capacity to 
AMA? 
Transport to 
MAR/PUCC 
voluntarily 
Safety Planning 
  
Contact Base, as 
needed, for  
medical direction 
and/or disposition  
decision-making 
assistance.  
 
Transport to 
MAR/PUCC 
involuntarily 
If disagreement 
between EMS and LPS-
evaluator, attempt to 
resolve. 
 
Contact Base for 
medical direction, if 
indicated. 
 
Defer to LPS-evaluator 
on final disposition.  
 
Transport to 
MAR/PUCC 
voluntarily 
Low risk 
Moderate or high risk 
or undetermined risk 
no 
no 
no 
yes 
no yes 
yes yes
