# 1187314 1306.1ColumbiaSuicideSeverityRiskScale

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 07-01-25                                                                                   PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
Medical Control Guideline: COLUMBIA SUICIDE SEVERITY RISK SCALE    Ref. No. 1306.1 
 
Instructions: Ask questions in quotations, mark “yes” or “no”.   
Follow the instructions in the grey prompts. 
 
 YES NO 
1. “In the past month, have you wished you were dead or wished 
you could go to sleep and not wake up?” 
 
(Passive SI) 
low risk 
 
2. “In the past month, have you actually had any thoughts about 
killing yourself?” 
 
(Active SI) 
low risk 
 
If YES to 2, ask questions 3, 4, 5, and 6 
If NO to 2, ask question 6 
3. “Have you thought about how you might do this?” 
 
(Suicide Method) 
moderate 
risk 
 
4. “Have you had any intention of action on these thoughts or 
killing yourself” (as opposed to you have the thoughts but you 
definitely would not act on them)? 
 
(Suicide Intent) 
high risk 
 
5. “Have you started to work out, or worked out, the details of 
how to kill yourself? Do you intend to carry out this plan?” 
 
(Suicide Plan) 
high risk 
 
Always ask question 6 
6a. “Have you ever done anything, started to do anything or 
prepared to do anything to end your life?” 
 
               Examples: Collected pills, obtained a gun, gave away valuables, wrote a      
               will or suicide note, held a gun but changed your mind, went to the roof  
               but didn’t jump, tried to hang yourself, etc.  
 
(Suicide attempt) 
moderate 
risk 
 
6b. “Was this in the past 3 months?” 
 
 
(Suicide attempt, recent) 
high risk
