# 206046 1010

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 03-01-86       PAGE 1 OF 8 
REVISED: 10-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-22 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the requirements for Los Angeles County Mobile Intensive Care 
Nurse (MICN) certification and recertification. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Chapter 2, Sections 1797.56, 1797.58, 
1797.63 and Chapter 3, Article 5, Section 1797.175; California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Sections 100168 – 100170 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN): A registered nurse authorized by the Medical Director of 
the local Emergency Medical Services (EMS) agency to provide prehospital advanced life 
support (ALS) or issue instructions to prehospital emergency personnel within an EMS system 
according to standardized procedures developed by the local EMS agency consistent with 
statewide guidelines. 
 
Base Hospital: Hospital responsible for directing the advanced life support system and 
prehospital care system assigned to it by the local EMS agency. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. An MICN is only certified to practice within Los Angeles County if authorized by the 
Medical Director of the Los Angeles County EMS Agency. 
 
2. Recertification application with approval from sponsoring agency and all applicable 
documentation must be received 30 days prior to certification expiration to ensure 
continuous certification. Continuing education (CE) must be completed during the 
current certification cycle to satisfy the requirements for recertification. CE completed 
during the month which the current certificate expires may be applied to the next 
recertification application if not used to meet the CE requirements for the current 
renewal. 
 
3. CE hours for nationally recognized classes, including but not limited to, Advanced 
Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS), Emergency 
Nursing Pediatric Course (ENPC), Trauma Nursing Core Course (TNCC), and Advanced 
Trauma Care for Nurses (ATCN) will be accepted as part of the required renewal CEs 
based on the hours on the Board of Registered Nursing issued certificate of completion. 
 
4. In the case of lapsed certification, only CE completed within the twenty-four (24) months 
prior to application for recertification shall apply to meet the requirements for 
recertification. 
 
5. Certification/recertification as an MICN shall be for two (2) years from the last day of the 
month in which all requirements are completed and the certification was issued. When 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 2 OF 8 
recertification requirements are met prior to the expiration date, the certification date will 
be the first day after the expiration of the current certification cycle. 
 
6. Upon successful completion of all certification requirements, the Los Angeles County 
EMS Agency shall issue an MICN certification card with the bearer’s name, certification 
number, effective date, expiration date, and signature of the EMS Agency Medical 
Director. 
 
7. In the event that an MICN is employed by more than one approved agency, a primary 
sponsor must be designated. All other agencies must be designated as secondary 
sponsors. The EMS Agency must be notified in writing of all sponsorship changes by 
submitting required data on the change of status/data update form to the Office of 
Certification.  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Eligibility for MICN Certification 
 
A. Licensed as a registered nurse (RN) in the United States for a period of not less 
than one (1) year and currently licensed in California. 
 
B. Employment equivalent to one (1) year full-time (36-40 hours/week) within the 
last three (3) years as a RN in a critical care area; six (6) months of which must 
be in the emergency department of an acute care hospital. 
 
C. Current American Heart Association (AHA) or American Red Cross (ARC) 
certification as an ACLS provider or instructor. 
 
II. Initial MICN Certification 
 
A. Meet the professional licensure and experience requirements as specified in 
Section I. 
 
B. Be sponsored by one of the following agencies approved to utilize MICNs in Los 
Angeles County: 
 
1. Base hospital 
 
2. EMS Agency 
 
3. Paramedic training program 
 
4. Paramedic provider agency 
 
C. Complete an approved Los Angeles County MICN Development Course. 
 
D. Complete a minimum of eight (8) hours field observation with a Los Angeles 
County ALS unit, and observe and document at least one (1) ALS patient 
assessment that results in an ALS transportation to a 9-1-1 receiving hospital 
and/or a base hospital contact. 
 
E. Application Process: 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 3 OF 8 
 
1. Completed Los Angeles County EMS Agency MICN Application and the 
established fee. 
 
2. Letter of Recommendation signed by the sponsoring facility/agency 
medical director, department supervisor, and prehospital care coordinator 
or equivalent. 
 
3. Documentation of a valid California RN license. 
 
4. Documentation of current AHA/ARC certification as an ACLS provider or 
instructor. 
 
5. Documentation of MICN Candidate Field Observation. 
 
6. Copy of MICN Development Course completion certificate. 
 
F. Certifying Examination Process 
 
1. All professional licensure and experience requirements must be met prior 
to the candidate taking the MICN certification examination. Certification 
application and documentation must be received at least ten (10) working 
days before the scheduled examination. Upon receipt of all required 
documents, the MICN candidate must pass the certifying examination 
within one (1) year of completing the MICN Development Course. 
 
2. A candidate who fails the MICN certification examination may retake the 
examination one time only. Retake exams may be taken after seven (7) 
days but within thirty (30) days of the initial exam. Failure to appear for 
the examination will be considered as an examination failure for purposes 
of retesting. 
 
3. A candidate who fails the retake examination must repeat the entire 
certification process which includes repeating the MICN Development 
Course. 
 
G. Radio Internship 
 
Upon successful completion of the MICN certification examination, the MICN 
candidate must complete a radio internship within six (6) months. A radio 
internship consists of a minimum of ten (10) base hospital ALS runs under the 
direct supervision of a certified MICN or base hospital physician. 
 
1. Radio internship requires a minimum of one (1) ALS run in each of the 
following categories: 
 
a. Neurology to include provider impressions of Altered Level of 
Consciousness, Seizure, or Stroke. 
 
b. Respiratory to include provider impressions of Respiratory 
Distress or Respiratory Arrest. 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 4 OF 8 
c. Trauma to include provider impressions of Crush Injury/Syndrome 
or Traumatic Injury that meets Trauma Center criteria or 
guidelines. 
 
d. Cardiovascular to include provider impression of Cardiac Arrest. 
 
e. Cardiovascular to include provider impressions of Cardiac Chest 
Pain or Cardiac Dysrhythmia. 
 
f. General Medical to include provider impression of Shock or 
Hypotension. 
 
g. Pediatric patient with any provider impression. 
 
2. If after fifteen (15) satisfactory ALS runs, the candidate has not met all 
category requirements, run categories may be simulated. 
 
3. A performance evaluation will be completed for each ALS run or 
simulation and a final written Radio Internship Evaluation based on the 
Los Angeles County Performance Evaluation Standards must be 
completed and submitted to the Office of Certification. 
 
4. The prehospital care coordinator shall submit a letter of explanation when 
the MICN candidate fails to complete the radio internship within six (6) 
months of the certification examination. If an extension is requested, the 
projected date of completion must be stated. Extensions may only be 
granted after review by the Office of Prehospital Certification. In no case 
may the radio internship exceed one (1) year from the date of the 
certification examination. 
 
5. An MICN candidate failing to meet the radio internship requirements will 
be eligible for certification only after successfully repeating the entire 
certification process, which includes repeating the MICN Development 
Course. 
 
III. MICN Certification by Challenge 
 
A. Eligibility Requirements: 
 
1. Licensed as a RN in California. 
 
2. Employed and sponsored by one of the agencies approved to utilize 
MICNs in Los Angeles County as specified in Section II.B. 
 
3. Current AHA/ARC certification as an ACLS provider or instructor. 
 
4. Complete a minimum of eight (8) hours field observation with a Los 
Angeles County ALS unit and observe and document at least one (1) ALS 
patient assessment with a base hospital contact. 
 
B. Application Process: 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 5 OF 8 
1. Completed Los Angeles County EMS Agency MICN Application and the 
established fee. 
 
2. Letter of Recommendation signed by the sponsoring facility/agency 
medical director, department supervisor, and prehospital care coordinator 
or equivalent. 
 
3. Documentation of a valid California RN license. 
 
4. Documentation of current or previous out of county MICN certification 
(expired no greater than two (2) years) 
 
5. Documentation of current AHA/ARC certification as an ACLS provider or 
instructor. 
 
6. Documentation of MICN Candidate Field Observation. 
 
 
C. Examination Process 
 
Pass the written certification examination as specified in Section II.F.1-3. 
 
D. Radio Internship 
 
Complete a radio internship as specified in Section II.G.1-5. 
 
IV. Recertification 
 
A. Eligibility Requirements for Continuous Certification 
 
1. Certified as a Los Angeles County MICN. 
 
2. Maintain continuous licensure as a RN in California. 
 
3. Maintain continuous AHA/ARC certification as an ACLS provider or 
instructor. 
 
4. Maintain sponsorship as specified in Section II.B.1-4. 
 
5. Complete a minimum of forty (40) hours of EMS continuing education 
(CE) every two (2) years (certification cycle). 
 
It is the responsibility of each recertification candidate to maintain 
documentation of his/her own continuing education hours, not the CE 
provider. Credit may be received no more than twice for attending the 
same educational session during the same certification cycle. 
 
EMS CE topics related to emergency and prehospital care include: 
 
a. Field Care Audits - Review of base hospital audio tapes and/or 
written patient care records totaling a minimum of twelve (12) 
hours. 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 6 OF 8 
 
b. Structured Field Experience – Field observation is mandatory for 
new MICN candidates and at initial renewal.  Following the initial 
renewal, field observations is optional or at the discretion of the 
Prehospital Care Coordinator (PCC). Field observation totaling a 
minimum of four (4) hours to a maximum of eight (hours), which 
must be documented on a MICN Recertification Field Observation 
CE Documentation form (Los Angeles County EMS Continuing 
Education Program Manual). 
 
c. Restricted CE - A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of required CE 
hours can be issued to an individual per certification cycle as 
follows: 
 
i. Teaching an approved CE course, EMT, AEMT, 
Paramedic training program, or MICN Development 
course. 
 
ii. Clinical precepting of EMS personnel. 
 
iii. Courses related to indirect patient care or medical 
operations. 
 
iv. Media-based/serial productions that are not instructor 
based. 
 
v. Employers sponsoring an MICN may further restrict 
continuing education hours in specific categories to meet 
their requirements for a recertification candidate. 
 
6. Complete all mandatory Los Angeles County EMS programs. 
 
7. Submit the following at least 30 days prior to certification expiration date: 
 
a. Completed Los Angeles County EMS Agency MICN Application 
with the established fee. 
 
b. Completed MICN Statement of Continuing Education. 
 
B. Eligibility Requirements for Certification Lapse of Less Than Six (6) Months 
 
1. Meet all recertification requirements as specified in Section IV.A.1-7. 
 
2. Complete an additional four (4) hours of Field Care Audits. 
 
C. Eligibility Requirements for Certification Lapse of Six (6) Months or More, But 
Less Than Twelve (12) Months 
 
1. Meet all recertification requirements as specified in Section IV.A.1-7. 
 
2. Complete an additional twelve (12) hours of CE, four (4) hours must be 
additional Field Care Audits. 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 7 OF 8 
 
3. Pass the Los Angeles County MICN Accreditation written examination. 
 
4. Complete a radio internship as specified in Section II.G.1-5. 
 
D. Eligibility Requirements for Certification Lapse of Twelve (12) Months or More, 
But Less Than Twenty-four (24) Months 
 
1. Meet all recertification requirements as specified in Section IV.A.1-7. 
 
2. Complete an additional twelve (12) hours of CE, four (4) hours must be 
additional Field Care Audits. 
 
 
3. Pass the MICN certification examination as specified in Section II.F.1-3. 
 
4. Complete a radio internship as specified in Section II.G.1-5. 
 
E. Eligibility Requirements for Certification Lapse of Twenty-four (24) Months or 
More 
 
Candidate is no longer eligible for recertification.  Individual shall meet all initial 
certification requirements as specified in Section II.A-G. 
 
F. Eligibility Requirements for Recertification of Reservists Deployed for Active Duty 
 
An individual who is a member of the reserves and is deployed for active duty 
with a branch of the Armed Forces of the United States, whose Los Angeles 
County MICN certificate expires during the time the individual is on active duty or 
less than six (6) months from the date the individual is deactivated/released from 
active duty, may be given an extension of the renewal of the individual’s MICN 
certificate for up to six (6) months from the date of the individual’s 
deactivation/release from active duty in order to meet the renewal requirements 
for the individual’s MICN certificate upon compliance with the following 
provisions: 
 
1. Provide documentation from the respective branch of the Armed Forces 
of the United States verifying the individual’s dates of activation and 
deactivation/release from duty. 
 
2. Complete a Los Angeles County EMS Agency MICN Application and pay 
the established fee. 
 
3. Demonstrate current holder and submit copies of: 
 
a. Licensure as a RN in California 
 
b. AHA/ARC certification as an ACLS provider or instructor 
 
4. Complete all mandatory Los Angeles County EMS programs. 
 
5. Be employed and sponsored as specified in Section II.B.1-4. 

SUBJECT: MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE 
 (MICN) CERTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 1010 
 
PAGE 8 OF 8 
 
6. Upon receipt and verification of the above items by the EMS Agency, the 
individual shall complete and submit the following requirements for 
renewal of their MICN certificate by the date specified; otherwise the 
individual shall complete requirements in accordance with Section III. 
 
a. Complete a minimum of forty (40) hours of EMS CE as specified 
in Section IV.A.5. 
 
b. Completed MICN Statement of Continuing Education. 
 
c. CE completed by the individual thirty (30) days prior to the current 
renewal certificate issued through the six (6) month extension of 
fulfilling requirements for renewal shall be valid. 
 
d. Complete a radio internship as specified in Section II.G.1-5. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Policy Manual: 
Ref. No. 1011,  Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) Field Observation 
Ref. No. 1013,  EMS CE Provider Approval and Program Requirements 
 
Sample Letter of Recommendation 
MICN Certification Application 
MICN Candidate Field Observation Documentation 
MICN Radio Internship Evaluation 
MICN Radio Internship Performance Evaluation Standards 
MICN Statement of Continuing Education 
MICN Field Observation Form 
MICN Field Observation Evaluation
