# 206106 1233

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SYNCOPE / NEAR SYNCOPE Ref. No. 1233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302)  
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
4. For symptomatic orthostasis, signs of dehydration or fluid losses, or for poor perfusion (MCG 
1355): ❶ ❷ 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion  
Reassess after each 250mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); stop 
infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
5. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308)  
Perform 12-Lead ECG and assess cardiac rhythm for patients >35 years of age and/or for those 
for which cardiac ischemia or dysrhythmia is suspected 
If cardiac dysrhythmia is present, treat per TP 1212, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Bradycardia or TP 
1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia 
If STEMI on 12-Lead ECG, treat per TP 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
 
6. Assess for signs of trauma ❸ 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury  
 
7. For persistent ALOC, treat in conjunction with TP 1229, ALOC  
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: SYNCOPE / NEAR SYNCOPE Ref. No. 1233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶   Patients who are lightheaded and/or tachycardic when sitting and/or standing compared to lying 
down, referred to as orthostatic, are likely dehydrated and in need for fluid resuscitation. Orthostatic 
vitals provide little information and may result in harm so should not be performed. Syncope can 
result from a lack of adequate perfusion to the brain, and in the setting of suspected dehydration or 
fluid losses, this can be a sign of poor perfusion.  Therefore, for patients who present with syncope 
with orthostasis and/or dehydration, fluid resuscitation is appropriate unless contraindicated.  Use 
caution in patients with history of congestive heart failure or renal insufficiency. 
 
❷    In a female with syncope, ask about possible pregnancy and any history of vaginal bleeding.  One   
cause of syncope in females is a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. This can be life threatening and may 
present with poor perfusion and require fluid resuscitation with Normal Saline. Alert Base if patient 
known to be pregnant. 
 
❸    Elderly patients should be evaluated carefully for traumatic injuries resulting from ground level falls.  
Common injuries include blunt head trauma and extremity fractures.
