# 206108 1241

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: OVERDOSE / POISONING / INGESTION Ref. No. 1241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:10-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
1. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
2. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
3. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) ❶ 
 
4. For suspected opioid overdose with altered mental status and hypoventilation/apnea: 
Naloxone 2-4 mg IN (1mg per nostril or 4mg/0.1 mL IN depending on formulation available) or  
Naloxone 2mg IM or 
Naloxone 0.8-2mg IV push, maximum dose all routes 8 mg  
Titrate to adequate respiratory rate and tidal volume ❶ 
 
5. For patients whose medical condition improves after naloxone and who demonstrate decision-
making capacity, offer “Leave Behind Naloxone” (MCG 1337) 
 
6. If partial response to Naloxone and strong suspicion for opioid overdose: 
CONTACT BASE for additional doses of Naloxone  
  
7. If available, consider capnography to monitor ventilations (MCG 1305) ❷ 
 
8. For respiratory distress, treat in conjunction with TP 1237, Respiratory Distress 
 
9. Initiate cardiac monitoring prn (MCG 1308)  
For suspected cardiac ischemia, treat in conjunction with TP 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
For patients with dysrhythmias, treat in conjunction with TP 1212, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - 
Bradycardia or TP 1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia - Tachycardia 
 
10. Evaluate for other causes of altered level of consciousness (MCG 1320) 
 
11. Assess for signs of trauma 
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury 
 
12. Check blood glucose 
If < 60mg/dL or > 200mg/dL, treat in conjunction with TP 1203, Diabetic Emergencies 
 
13. For alcohol intoxication, document Provider Impression – Alcohol Intoxication 
For other intoxications, including overdose or ill effects of prescription medications and illicit 
substances, document Provider Impression – Overdose/Poisoning/Ingestion 
 
14. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355):  
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion 
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207,  Shock/Hypotension 
 
15. CONTACT BASE to discuss antidote administration 
 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: OVERDOSE / POISONING / INGESTION Ref. No. 1241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:10-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 3 
Calcium channel and/or beta blocker overdose: Calcium chloride 1g (10mL) IV push over 60 
seconds❸ 
Tricyclic overdose: Sodium bicarbonate 50mEq (50mL) IV push over 60 seconds ❹ 
 
16. Assess for co-ingestion of other substances  
 
17. Consider contacting the Poison Control Center (1-800-222-1222) in conjunction with Base for 
assistance with identification and management of unknown medications/toxins (Ref. 805) 
 
18. Bring containers of ingested substances to the Emergency Department with patient 
 
19. If patient refuses recommended treatment or transport, CONTACT BASE  
Patient must demonstrate decision making capacity (Ref. 834) 
If EMS personnel or Base Hospital determines it is necessary to transport the patient against 
their will, contact law enforcement for assistance 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: OVERDOSE / POISONING / INGESTION Ref. No. 1241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:10-01-24 PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶  The first priority for apneic patients after narcotic overdose is to begin positive pressure ventilation.  
Once ventilations are established, naloxone should be administered with the goal of restoring 
spontaneous ventilations.  Vascular access should not take priority over initial treatment with 
Naloxone (IN or IM) for patients with suspected opiate overdose. Patients who are awake and alert 
with normal respirations after naloxone therapy may not require IV access or additional doses of 
naloxone. 
 
❷  Persistently high or increasing end-tidal CO
2
 (EtCO
2
) readings above normal with low respiratory rate 
indicate respiratory failure (bradypneic hypoventilation); whereas low EtCO
2
 readings with a low 
respiratory rate may also represent respiratory failure due to low tidal volumes (hypopneic 
hypoventilation); consider the need for assisted ventilation in these cases. 
 
❸  Signs of calcium channel overdose include bradycardia along with hypotension and hyperglycemia. 
Signs of beta blocker overdose include bradycardia along with hypotension and hypoglycemia. 
Consider when the patient is taking or has access to a calcium channel and/or beta blocker 
medication. Ask about potential exposures including medications in the home. 
 
❹  ECG findings consistent with tricyclic overdose include wide QRS (>0.12mm) and terminal R in aVR. 
Consider when the patient is taking or has access to a tricyclic medication. Ask about potential 
exposures including medications in the home.
