# 206175 22612 15 14

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
   (EMT/PARAMEDIC)  
SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-15-06 PAGE 1 OF 7  
REVISED: 10-01-21 
SUPERSEDES: 06-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish minimum standards for private ambulance provider medical dispatch 
programs. 
 
AUTHORITY:  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.220 and 1798 (a), California 
Code of Regulations, Sections 100172, 100173 and 100175, Los Angeles 
County Code, Chapter 7.16 Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act (HITECH) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Advanced Life Support (ALS) Transport: The transport of a patient who requires patient care 
and/or monitoring that is within the paramedic scope of practice. Such transport is performed 
utilizing an ALS vehicle that has been approved and meets the requirements specified in 
Reference No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory. 
 
Basic Life Support (BLS) Transport: The transport of a patient who requires patient care 
and/or monitoring that is within the emergency medical technician (EMT) scope of practice.  
Such transport is performed utilizing a BLS vehicle that has been approved and which meets 
the requirements specified in Reference No. 710, Basic Life Support Ambulance Equipment. 
 
Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD): An electronic data management system designed to assist 
providers in managing ambulance vehicle resources with patient transportation requests and 
serves as a digital recorder of patient data, provider resource availability and transport pick-up 
and drop-off times and locations. 
 
Dispatch Medical Director: A physician licensed in California, board certified or eligible in 
emergency medicine, possesses knowledge of emergency medical systems in California and 
the local jurisdiction, and provides medical dispatch medical direction and oversees medical 
dispatch. 
 
Emergency Call: A request for an ambulance where an individual who has not been evaluated 
and stabilized to the extent possible by a physician on scene at a health facility, has a need for 
immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by the 
emergency medical personnel or a public agency that responds to 9-1-1 medical calls. 
 
Emergency Medical Condition: A condition or situation in which an individual has an 
immediate need for medical attention. The presence of abnormal vital signs (heart rate and 
rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure – except for isolated asymptomatic hypertension, 
oxygen saturation) are also indications of an emergency medical condition. Patients who meet 
any criteria for Base Contact or Receiving Hospital Notification (as listed in Ref. No. 1200.1, 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 2 OF 7 
Treatment Protocols, et al.) are also considered to have an emergency medical condition. 
These conditions include, but is not limited to, the following: 
• Anaphylaxis 
• Cardiopulmonary arrest 
• Bradydysrhythmias and Tachydysrhythmias 
• Patients in labor 
• Persistent altered level of consciousness (new onset) 
• Respiratory distress and/or failure 
• Signs or symptoms of shock 
• Signs and symptoms of stroke 
• Status epilepticus 
• Suspected cardiac chest pain or discomfort 
• Severe traumatic injuries 
 
Interfacility Call: A request for patient transport originating from a health facility for 
transportation to another health facility. 
 
Jurisdictional 9-1-1 Referral Call: A call received for patient transport where the patient’s 
condition or presentation meets the definition of emergency medical condition based on the 
medical dispatcher’s evaluation of the patient’s status, based on information provided by the 
caller, or EMT’s assessment and evaluation upon arrival at the pick-up location. 
 
Non 9-1-1 Medical Dispatcher/Call Taker: A person employed by a private provider agency 
who provides medical dispatch services and is  currently certified as an Emergency Medical 
Dispatcher (EMD),   Emergency Telecommunicator (ETC) or Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT).  
 
Non-emergency call: A request for the transport of a patient to or from a private residence, 
health facility or other non-medical facility in a licensed ambulance and which is neither an 
emergency call nor a critical care transport. 
 
Prescheduled Call: A prearranged request for transportation scheduled in advance for the 
purpose of ensuring that an ambulance vehicle is available to transport the patient at 
predetermined date(s) and time(s). 
 
Private Call: A request for patient transport originating from either a private residence or a non-
medical facility to a health facility or non-medical facility. 
 
Re-Route Call: A basic life support call in which field EMTs determine, based on their 
assessment and evaluation of the patient during transport, that a change in the patient transport 
destination to the most accessible receiving (MAR) facility is warranted, due to a change in the 
patient’s condition such that the patient meets the definition of emergency medical condition. 
 
Specialty Care Transport (SCT): The transport of a patient who requires patient care and/or 
monitoring that is within the Registered Nurse (RN) or Respiratory Care Practitioner (RCP) 
scope of practice. Such transport is performed utilizing a SCT vehicle that has been approved 
and meets the requirements specified in Reference No. 712, Nurse Staffed Specialty Care 
Transport Inventory or Reference No. 713, Respiratory Care Practitioner Staffed Specialty Care 
Transport Unit Inventory. 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 3 OF 7 
Urgent Call: An unplanned request for patient transportation (within one hour) of a non-
emergent patient to a health facility.  This will generally be a transport to an emergency 
department or urgent care. 
 
Wait & Return Call: A request for patient transportation in which the caller requests that the 
ambulance crew wait for the patient at the receiving destination then return the patient to the 
original pick-up location; during this time, EMTs must remain at the patient destination and the 
ambulance and personnel may not respond to any other calls. 
 
PRINCIPLES:  
 
1. Private provider agency dispatch personnel are responsible for determining whether the 
call is appropriate for private provider transport or if referral to the jurisdictional 9-1-1 
provider is required due to an emergency. 
 
2. Private ambulance providers are prohibited from dispatching an ambulance to any call 
that would normally be considered an emergency 9-1-1 call for the authorized 
emergency transportation provider for that geographical area. A private ambulance 
provider may only dispatch an ambulance to such a call if the request is from either the 
9-1-1 jurisdictional provider or the authorized emergency transportation provider 
requesting back-up services. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Private Provider Agency Medical Dispatch Program Requirements 
 
Private provider agencies are responsible for maintaining dispatch requirements that 
include the following: 
 
A. Basic Medical Dispatcher/Call Taker Training 
 
B. Dispatch Policies and Procedures in accordance with Prehospital Care Manual 
and with Los Angeles County 
 
C. Records management of dispatcher’s current EMT, Emergency Medical 
Dispatcher (EMD) or Emergency Telecommunicator (ETC) certification and in-
service training 
 
D. Staffing 
 
E. Medical Direction and Oversight 
 
F. Establishment and maintenance of a Quality Improvement Program in 
accordance with Ref. No. 620 
 
G. Dispatch Data Collection 
 
II. Private Provider Individual Dispatcher/Call Taker Requirements 
 
A. Minimum qualifications for medical dispatchers/call takers: 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 4 OF 7 
1. Current certification as an EMD or ETC meeting the standards of the 
National Academies of Emergency Medical Dispatch or current EMT in 
the State of California 
 
2. New employees hired as dispatchers/call takers must have current EMD, 
ETC, or EMT within six (6) months of the date of hire 
 
B. Medical Dispatcher/Call Taker duties include: 
 
1. Receiving and processing calls for non 9-1-1 transport or referral to 
jurisdictional 9-1-1 provider when indicated 
 
2. Determining, through key medical questions and as outlined in 
prehospital care policies, the nature and urgency of a medical incident, 
whether the call is emergent or non-emergent and the level of service 
required. 
 
3. Dispatching the appropriate level of resources and the mode of response: 
 
a. BLS Transport 
 b. ALS Transport 
 c. SCT Transport 
 
4. Giving corresponding information to responding personnel 
 
5. Coordinating with jurisdictional 9-1-1 EMS providers or the authorized 
emergency transportation provider requesting back-up services 
 
6. Maintaining patient information confidentiality and security 
 
III.   Private Provider Agency Policies and Procedure Requirements 
 
 Private Provider Agencies are responsible for developing and maintaining company 
specific policies and procedures that ensure compliance with the County Code and/or 
Prehospital Care policy and shall address, at minimum, the following: 
 
A. The medical dispatch call is completed and call back number is obtained. 
 
B. Systematized caller interview questions. Refer to Reference 226.1, Private 
Ambulance Provider Non 9-1-1 Dispatch Caller Interview Guidelines. 
 
C. Protocols that determine vehicle response mode and configuration or referral to 
the 9-1-1 jurisdictional provider based on the medical dispatcher’s/call taker’s 
evaluation of severity of injury or illness. 
 
D. A call classification system that describes how the provider identifies the 
following call types: 
 
1. Non-Emergency Calls 
 
a. Private Calls 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 5 OF 7 
b. Interfacility Calls 
 
i. Pre-Scheduled Calls 
ii. Urgent Calls 
 
2. Emergency Calls 
 
a. Jurisdictional 9-1-1 Referral Calls 
 
i. Private Calls 
ii. Interfacility Calls 
 
b. Re-Route or Upgraded Calls – Dispatcher/Call Taker shall 
immediately perform the following: 
 
i. Dispatcher/Call Taker shall document the date, time and 
rationale for re-route of the patient 
ii. Contact the MAR facility where the patient is being 
transported and provide the patient information 
iii. Contact the original receiving location and inform them that 
the patient is being transported to an alternate location 
iv.  Contact the original pick-up location and inform them of the 
change in patient destination and provide them with the 
new destination 
3. Wait and Return Calls 
 
E. Roles and responsibilities of the Dispatcher/Call taker during a Multiple Casualty 
Incident (MCI) as outlined in Reference No. 519.3, Multiple Casualty Incident 
Transportation Management 
 
F. Protocols that describe the data system utilized and the requirements for data 
entry (CAD or hand-written copy) 
 
G. A record-keeping system, including report forms or a computer data 
management system to permit evaluation of patient care records and ensuring 
that patient confidentiality is maintained in compliance with protected health 
information (PHI) regulations including the Health Insurance Portability 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act 
 
IV. Staffing 
 
The dispatch center shall be staffed with sufficient personnel to accomplish all dispatch 
operations and management which include: 
 
A. A readily accessible dispatch supervisor or designee twenty-four (24) hours a 
day, seven (7) days a week 
 
B. Medical dispatchers who have met minimum certification requirements 
 
C. Medical dispatch staff that is on site on a continuous 24-hour basis 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 6 OF 7 
V. Medical Direction and Oversight 
 
Dispatch centers shall appoint a medical director who will provide medical oversight of 
the dispatch center by: 
 
A. Reviewing and approving all dispatch policies and procedures related to patient 
care 
 
B. Providing ongoing periodic review of dispatch records for identification of 
potential patient care issues 
 
C. Providing oversight and participating in dispatch quality improvement, risk 
management and compliance activities 
 
VI. Dispatch Data Collection 
 
A. Such information will include, at minimum, the following data elements and the 
date and time (hours and minutes) for the: 
 
1. Initial call  
2. Patient complaint/problem at time of call 
3. Dispatch of ambulance 
4. Ambulance enroute to call 
5. Ambulance on scene of incident 
6. Ambulance enroute to facility/destination 
7. Ambulance arrival at    facility/destination 
8. Ambulance available 
9. Ambulance cancelled, if applicable 
10. Calls that have been referred to 9-1-1; if applicable 
 
B. The dispatch and patient care data shall be made available upon request to the 
EMS Agency for review 
 
VII. Site surveys  
The EMS Agency will conduct, at minimum, annual site surveys to audit compliance with 
medical dispatch standards, agreement obligations, policy and procedure, and any other 
regulations applicable to the operations of medical dispatch.  
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 226.1, Private Ambulance Provider Non 9-1-1 Medical Dispatch Caller Interview 
Questions 
Ref. No. 414, Specialty Care Transport (SCT) Provider 
Ref. No. 517, Private Provider Agency Transport/Response Guidelines 
Ref. No. 519.3, Multiple Casualty Incident Transportation Management 
Ref. No. 602, Confidentiality of Patient Information 
Ref. No. 618,      EMS Quality Improvement Program Committee 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program (EQIP) 
Ref. No. 710, Basic Life Support Ambulance Equipment 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 226 
 NON 9-1-1 MEDICAL DISPATCH 
 
PAGE 7 OF 7 
Ref. No. 712, Nurse Staffed Critical Care Transport (CCT) Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 713, Respiratory Care Practitioner Staffed Critical Care Transport Unit 
Inventory 
Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al.
