# 206164 20410 01 15

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES   
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   
 
SUBJECT: MEDICAL COUNCIL REFERENCE NO. 204 
                         
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 06-30-78                                                                PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED/REVIEWED: 01-01-23  
SUPERSEDES: 05-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: _________________________            __________________________________ 
                   Director, EMS Agency                             Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To describe the composition and function of a Medical Council that will advise the 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency’s Medical Director. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. There shall be a Medical Council that provides specialized advice to the Medical Director of 
the EMS Agency (Chair). 
 
II. Medical Council membership shall include physician representative of the following: 
 
A. Paramedic Base Hospitals 
 
B. 9-1-1 receiving hospitals (non- base/non-trauma center) 
 
C. Health maintenance organizations 
 
D. Trauma Centers 
 
E. Public paramedic provider agencies 
 
F. Private ambulance companies 
 
G. Los Angeles County Medical Association 
 
Note: Physicians interested in serving on the Medical Council who are affiliated with 
one or more of the entities noted above shall submit a written request for 
membership to the EMS Agency’s Medical Director for consideration. 
 
III. Ex Officio Medical Council membership shall include: 
 
A. A Prehospital Care Coordinator representing the EMS Commission’s Base Hospital 
Advisory Committee 
 
B. A Paramedic Coordinator representing the EMS Commission’s Provider Agency 
Advisory Committee 
 
C. A member of the Trauma Hospital Advisory Committee 
 
IV. Other Physician specialist(s) may be included as required for specific subject matter 
V. The Medical Council shall meet quarterly as scheduled by the chairperson. 
VI. Medical Council meetings shall be open and public as required by law. 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL COUNCIL REFERENCE NO. 204 
                    
 
                                                                PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
VII. Functions of the Medical Council shall include, but not limited, to: 
 
A. Providing specialized advice to the EMS Agency Medical Director to meet their 
statutory responsibilities to develop written medical policies and procedures and 
standards of patient care and to maintain medical oversight of the local EMS system. 
 
B. Assisting in the evaluation of prehospital emergency medical care treatment 
procedures or drugs for use on a trial basis by prehospital care personnel. 
 
C. Providing liaison between the EMS Agency Medical Director, hospitals and Provider 
Agency Medical Directors.
