# 206177 228

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  (HEALTHCARE FACILITIES, 
  EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: REDDINET® UTILIZATION  REFERENCE NO. 228 
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-15-10  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines to Los Angeles County ReddiNet® System users for 
communication and coordination of hospital diversion status, facility services 
available, multiple casualty incidents (MCI), disaster assessment polls, 
messages, and bed availability reporting activities. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The ReddiNet® System is the designated emergency and disaster communication 
system established for facilities and agencies within Los Angeles County’s medical and 
health system. 
 
2. It is the responsibility of each facility or organization to ensure its ReddiNet® System is 
maintained per the ReddiNet® Users’ Master Agreement and to ensure that it remains 
online at all times. 
 
3. The ReddiNet® visual and audible alarms are to be maintained at an adequate level to 
alert staff within a facility at all times. The System shall be placed in a location easily 
accessible to personnel within each facility. 
 
4. The use of the ReddiNet® computer should be limited to the operation of the ReddiNet® 
System and access to Emergency Medical Service(s) (EMS) educational materials only. 
Accessing the internet or other applications on this computer is not recommended. 
 
5. Each facility is responsible for adequately training and annually verifying personnel’s 
competency and having at least one staff member who is knowledgeable in the use of 
the ReddiNet® System on duty at all times. 
 
6. Release of protected health information (PHI) shall be in accordance with each facility’s 
internal policies. 
 
POLICY 
 
I. Emergency Department Diversion Status 
 
Hospitals will utilize the ReddiNet® System to update all diversion status pursuant to 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Patients. 
 
II. Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
 
During an MCI, the Medical Alert Center (MAC) or designated paramedic base hospital 
will coordinate patient destination activities pursuant to Ref. No. 519, Management of 
Multiple Casualty Incidents. 
 
 

SUBJECT: REDDINET® UTILIZATION REFERENCE NO. 228 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
III. Bed Availability 
 
Health facilities will follow the guidelines for reporting bed availability pursuant to Ref. 
No. 1122, Bed Availability Reporting. 
 
IV. Assessment Polls 
 
A. To assist with the coordination of emergency resource management, the MAC 
sends assessment polls to health care facilities to complete and return. 
Assessment polls ask health care facilities specific questions and require a 
response. 
 
B. In the event of a Countywide or regional disaster, health care facilities should 
anticipate the initiation of a ReddiNet® Facility Status assessment poll. 
 
C. Healthcare facilities must respond to the assessment polls within the timeframe 
specified on the assessment poll. 
 
V. Messages 
 
A. All facilities are expected to utilize the ReddiNet® messages function to 
communicate appropriate information about their facility to other facilities, the 
EMS Agency, and the Department of Public Health (DPH). 
 
B. All messages that are appropriate for dissemination to other staff are to be 
printed or otherwise shared with affected staff. 
 
C. Users are to limit sent messages and message replies to affected parties only. 
 
1. Messages and message replies should be short, concise, and relevant. 
 
2. Since the ReddiNet® network includes hospitals, clinics, EMS and Public 
Health agencies, fire, ambulance, law enforcement, and other related 
agencies, each ReddiNet® user is expected to be very selective when 
sending messages, as not all messages are intended for all network 
users. 
 
3. Replies to messages should be limited to the creator of the message 
unless necessary to copy others. If copies are deemed necessary, users 
need to open the menu selections and individually select recipients from 
the recipient list. 
 
D. ReddiNet® can support message attachments, which allows users to attach 
electronic files. 
 
E. All communications exchanged via the ReddiNet® messages function that 
contain protected health information (PHI) must comply with Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy rules. 
 
VI. Bioterrorism and Health Surveillance 
 
A. DPH may initiate disease surveillance programs utilizing ReddiNet®. These will 
be in the form of assessment polls that ask for specific information. 

SUBJECT: REDDINET® UTILIZATION REFERENCE NO. 228 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
 
B. Each facility is to ensure that these assessments are answered promptly. This 
will likely require involvement of Infectious/Communicable Disease staff at each 
facility. This does not replace the obligation of health care providers to report 
certain diseases on a Confidential Morbidity Report (CMR) pursuant to Title 17, 
California Code of Regulations, §2500 (rev. 1996). 
 
C. Each 9-1-1 receiving facility must provide daily value data to DPH which 
includes: Total ED Visits, Total Admissions, Total ICU Admissions, and Total 
Deaths. 
 
VII. MCI Reported Patients 
 
A. During multiple casualty incidents and disasters, facilities that received patients 
can enter patient information under the “Add Patients” button in the ReddiNet® 
module on the MCI tab. During an incident, facilities shall promptly enter the 
following data: patient’s first and last name, gender, age, status, and disposition.  
The MCI module will aid facilities with family reunification activities and in locating 
patients. This data is considered PHI for HIPAA purposes. 
 
B. The exchange of PHI between facilities and counties for disaster relief purposes 
would be permitted under HIPAA without express patient authorization. However, 
this exception still requires the covered entity to provide the individual an 
opportunity to agree or object to such disclosure unless, under the 
circumstances, in the exercise of professional judgment, the covered entity 
determines that trying to get such consent would interfere with its ability to 
respond to the emergency. 
 
C. In the absence of a situation invoking the disaster relief authority of the County, it 
is permissible to share information that would otherwise be in the facility’s 
directory. Assuming the patient does not object, the information would include 
their name, location, and general condition. If the patient is deceased, that 
information may also be disclosed. The information regarding the patient’s 
gender and age would generally not be subject to disclosure except, in the 
professional judgment of the covered entity, when it is necessary to aid in 
identifying the patient by a family member. 
 
D. When accessing the Reported Patients information, the following is 
recommended: 
 
1. Request the patient’s permission whenever possible. 
 
2. Solicit identifying information from the calling party instead of giving 
information to the calling party to the extent that it allows confirmation of 
the victim’s location as entered on the Reported Patients screen. 
 
E. Each facility’s Reported Patient tab will show all data fields for that facility’s data 
entry; however, the condition will be suppressed for other facilities’ patients 
entered on the screen. Only name, gender, age, and location for patients in other 
facilities will be visible. 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: REDDINET® UTILIZATION REFERENCE NO. 228 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
VIII. Non - Hospital Users 
 
A. Community clinics, long term care facilities, ambulatory surgery centers, dialysis 
centers, home health and hospice agencies and paramedic providers with 
ReddiNet® access shall incorporate ReddiNet® communications into their facility 
disaster and emergency response plans. 
 
B. Healthcare facilities shall respond to assessment polls (drills or actual events) 
within 60 minutes of receipt. Responses will be aggregated by the EMS Agency 
or according to sector-specific emergency response protocols. 
 
IX. Resource Requests 
 
A. ReddiNet® allows healthcare entities to submit and track medical resource 
requests.  It is the preferred resource tracking system employed by the County. 
 
B. Resource requests can be entered in the Resource Request tab, by selecting 
the ‘New Resource Request” button and completing the required information, to 
include: Mission and/or Tasks; Order type; and verifying that the three (3) 
requirements outlined on the form are completed; as well as management 
review and verification was completed before submitting the request. 
 
C. Current resource request status can be seen in the second column.  Further 
detail is visible when the specific resource request is highlighted. 
 
D. If any questions arise during the processing of the request, communication 
regarding the progress of the request can be seen in the comments section 
when the specific resource request is highlighted in the Resource Requests 
column. 
 
X. ReddiNet® System Failure or Disruptions 
 
If the ReddiNet® System is not functioning, facilities are to utilize the following 
procedure: 
 
A. Attempt to resolve the problem at the computer. Check for correct power and 
internet connections as well as correct log-in and password. 
 
B. Notify the facility ReddiNet® coordinator or IT department according to facility 
policy. 
 
C. Access the 24-hour ReddiNet® Help Line number at 1-800-440-7808 as needed. 
 
D. Notify other facilities and the EMS Agency of the status of the ReddiNet® System 
and the anticipated return to service. Updates should be provided every 8 hours 
until the system is functional. Facilities should make arrangements with another 
facility or the EMS Agency to notify ReddiNet® System participants of the 
disruption as well as perform any functions in ReddiNet® on their behalf as 
described in the above section of this policy, until service is restored. 
 
E. Notify other facilities and the EMS Agency when the ReddiNet® System is fully 
operational. 
 

SUBJECT: REDDINET® UTILIZATION REFERENCE NO. 228 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
F. 9-1-1 Receiving Hospitals shall utilize ReddiNet Satellite Services to provide a 
dedicated system backup.   
 
 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
 
Ref. No. 503,  Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Patients 
Ref. No. 519,  Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents  
Ref. No. 1122, Bed Availability Reporting
