# 206176 227

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: DISPATCHING OF EMERGENCY REFERENCE NO. 227 
 MEDICAL SERVICES 
EFFECTIVE: 02-15-10  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 01-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-17 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To establish minimum requirements for the dispatching of emergency medical 
services. 
 
AUTHORITY:  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 
State of California Health and Human Services Agency, Emergency Medical 
Services Authority, Dispatch Program Guidelines, March 2003 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Continuing Dispatch Education: Development and implementation of educational 
experiences designed to enhance knowledge and skill in the application of dispatch. 
 
Dispatch Center Medical Director: A physician licensed in California, board certified or eligible 
in emergency medicine, who possesses knowledge of emergency medical services (EMS) 
systems in California and the local jurisdiction and who is familiar with dispatching systems and 
methodologies; or a physician responsible for the dispatch medical direction of the nationally–
recognized EMD program. 
 
Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD): A system of telecommunications established to enable 
the general public to request emergency assistance, which provides medically approved pre-
arrival instructions, and dispatches a level of response according to pre-established provider 
guidelines through caller interrogation by a specially trained dispatcher. 
 
Emergency Medical Dispatcher/ Call taker: An employee of an agency providing emergency 
medical dispatch services who has completed a nationally recognized dispatch program or 
Provider Agency specific program approved by the EMS Agency, and who is currently certified 
as an Emergency Medical Dispatcher (EMD), or Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) with 
current local scope of practice training. An Emergency Medical Dispatcher/Call taker is specially 
trained to provide post-dispatch/pre-arrival instructions. 
Post-dispatch/Pre-arrival instructions: Telephone rendered protocols reflecting current 
evidence based medical practice and standards, including instructions intended to encourage 
callers to provide simple lifesaving maneuvers to be used after EMS units have been dispatched 
and prior to their arrival. 
 
Quality Improvement:  A program designed to evaluate, monitor, and improve performance 
and compliance with policies and procedures to ensure safe, efficient, and effective delivery of 
emergency medical dispatching. 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
1. All callers requesting emergency medical care should have direct access to qualified 
dispatch personnel for the provision of EMS. 
 

SUBJECT:  DISPATCHING OF EMERGENCY REFERENCE NO. 227 
 MEDICAL SERVICES 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
2. EMS Provider Agencies that implement Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD) should 
comply with the State of California Health and Human Services Agency, Emergency 
Services Authority, Dispatch Program Guidelines of March 2003 and Los Angeles 
County EMS policies. 
 
3. EMS Provider Agencies that do not currently utilize EMD are required to incorporate 
post-dispatch/pre-arrival instructions   in their practice of dispatching EMS.  These 
providers should comply with the minimum requirements established in Ref. No. 227, 
Dispatching of Emergency Medical Services or send the highest level of care available. 
 
4. The emergency medical dispatching protocols developed by the dispatch center shall be 
approved by the Dispatch Center Medical Director. 
 
POLICY 
 
I. Program Requirements 
 
A. Each dispatch center shall have a Dispatch Center Medical Director to oversee 
protocol development, quality improvement and shall have a Dispatch 
Coordinator to oversee daily operations. 
 
B. If the dispatch center utilizes a nationally-recognized EMD program, the following 
shall be submitted to the EMS Agency: 
 
1. Name of EMD program 
 
2. Name of Dispatch Center Medical Director 
 
3. Post-dispatch/Pre-arrival instructions that are clearly defined in 
compliance with EMS Agency guidelines 
 
4. Quality Improvement Program 
 
C. If the dispatch center develops its   own emergency medical dispatching protocols, 
the following shall be submitted to the EMS Agency:  
 
1. Education standards and qualifications for call-takers and dispatchers 
 
2. Pre-determined interrogation questions 
 
3. Guidelines and procedures that assist with decision-making 
 
4. Post-dispatch/Pre-arrival instructions that are clearly defined in 
compliance with EMS agency guidelines 
 
5. Quality Improvement Program 
 
6. Name, contact information, and credentials of the Dispatch Center 
Medical Director 
 
II. Dispatch Center Medical Director 
 

SUBJECT:  DISPATCHING OF EMERGENCY REFERENCE NO. 227 
 MEDICAL SERVICES 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
Provides medical direction and oversight of the emergency medical dispatch program by 
review and approval of: 
 
A. Policies and procedures related to Emergency Medical Dispatch and patient care 
 
B. Standards for qualifying education and continuing education 
 
C. Dispatch guidelines including pre-arrival instructions 
 
D. Oversees quality improvement (QI) and compliance standards 
 
E. Provides ongoing periodic review of dispatch records for identification of potential 
patient care issues 
 
F. Provides oversight and participates in dispatch quality improvement, risk 
management and compliance activities 
 
G. Attends, participates by phone conference call, or sends a representative to  the 
Dispatch Center Advisory meetings scheduled by the Los Angeles County EMS 
Agency 
 
III.   Emergency Dispatch Coordinator 
 
A. Oversees daily operations of the center and ensures staffing on a continuous 24-
hour basis of qualified Emergency Medical Dispatchers/Call-Takers that meets 
the EMS provider agency’s needs 
 
B. Ensures that a dispatch supervisor or designee is readily accessible 24 hours 
daily 
 
C. Ensures for availability of a 24-hour contact phone number to be utilized to 
coordinate or disseminate information in case of critical incident or disease 
outbreak 
 
D. Coordinates QI activities with the Medical Director. 
 
1. Provides ongoing periodic review of dispatch records for identification of 
potential patient care issues 
 
2. Participates in dispatch quality improvement, risk management and 
compliance activities 
 
3. Attends or participates by phone conference call in the Dispatch Center 
Advisory meetings scheduled by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
 
IV. Emergency Medical Dispatcher / Call-Taker Qualifications 
 
A. Initial Qualifications 
 
1. A Valid current BLS certification at the healthcare provider level.  Must 
include hands on skills validation (e.g., American Heart Association, 

SUBJECT:  DISPATCHING OF EMERGENCY REFERENCE NO. 227 
 MEDICAL SERVICES 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
American Red Cross, National Safety Council, or American Safety Health 
Institute) 
 
2. EMD Certification, or a minimum initial training of twenty-four (24) hours 
that meets the requirements of the California EMS Authority’s Emergency 
Medical Services Dispatch Program Guidelines 
 
B. Recertification 
 
1. Recertification as an EMD, if applicable 
 
2. A minimum of (twenty-four) 24 hours of continuing dispatch education 
(CDE) every two years. 
V. Quality Improvement: 
A. The Emergency Medical Dispatch Center shall have a Quality Improvement 
Program that will evaluate indicators specific to the dispatch of emergency 
medical services in order to foster continuous improvement in performance and 
quality patient care. 
B. Each QI Program shall have a written plan that includes, at minimum, the 
following components: 
1. Mission statement, objectives, and goals for process improvement 
 
2. Organizational chart or narrative description of how the QI program is 
integrated within the dispatch center, process(s) for data collection and 
reporting. Include templates utilized in standardize reports 
 
3. Key performance measures or indicators related to    delivery of emergency 
medical dispatching. Methods or activities designed to address 
deficiencies and measure compliance to protocol standards as 
established by the EMD Medical Director through ongoing random case 
review for each emergency medical dispatcher 
 
4. Activities designed to acknowledge excellence in the delivery of 
emergency medical dispatch performance  
 
5. The QI process shall: 
 
a. Monitor the quality of medical instruction given to callers, including 
ongoing random case review for each emergency medical 
dispatcher and observing telephone care rendered by
 emergency 
medical dispatchers for compliance with defined standards. 
 
b. Conduct random or incident specific case reviews to identify 
calls/practices that demonstrate excellence in dispatch 
performance and/or identify practices that do not conform to 
defined policy or procedures so that appropriate training can be 
initiated. 
 

SUBJECT:  DISPATCHING OF EMERGENCY REFERENCE NO. 227 
 MEDICAL SERVICES 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
c. Review EMD reports, and/or other records of patient care to 
compare performance against medical standards of practice. 
 
d. Recommend training, policies and procedures for quality 
improvement. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Pre-hospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 226, Private Ambulance Provider Non 9-1-1 Medical Dispatch  
Ref. No: 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program
