# 206170 214

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY  REFERENCE NO. 214 
 REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 03-05-87       PAGE 1 OF 6 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for reporting actual or possible violation(s) of California 
Health and Safety Code Section 1798.200, Sub-sections (a) through (c) and 
comply with relevant employer reporting responsibilities. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.200, 1798.200.  
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 4, Sections 100168, 100172 
100173; Chapter 6, Section 100208.1; Base Hospital Agreement. 
 
PRINCIPLE:  
 
Prior to initiating disciplinary proceedings, all information available to the Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency, or received from a credible source shall be evaluated for evidence of a 
threat to public health and safety pursuant to Section 1798.200 of the Health and Safety Code. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Authorized Representative: The base hospital Medical Director, emergency department 
manager/director, or prehospital care coordinator; or, provider agency Medical Director, 
Chief/CEO, emergency medical services director, or paramedic coordinator. 
 
California EMT Certifying Entity: A public safety agency, if the agency has a training program 
for EMT personnel that is approved pursuant to the standards developed pursuant to Section 
1797.109 of the Health and Safety code, or the Medical Director of the local EMS agency 
(LEMSA). 
 
Certification Action: Action taken on a certification or local accreditation by the Medical Director 
of the local emergency medical services agency. Action can vary to include probation, 
suspension to revocation. 
 
Disciplinary Cause: An act that is substantially related to the qualification, functions, and duties 
of prehospital personnel and is evidence of a threat to public health and safety, per Health and 
Safety Code Section 1798.200. 
 
Discipline: A disciplinary action taken by a relevant employer pursuant to California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22 Division 9, Chapter 6, Section 100206.2. 
 
Disciplinary Plan: A written plan of action that can be taken by a relevant employer as a 
consequence of any action listed in the California Health and Safety Code Section 1798.200(c). 
The disciplinary plan may include recommendation for certification actions pursuant to the Model 
Disciplinary Orders. 
 
Local EMS Agency (LEMSA): The agency, department or office having primary responsibility 

SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY 
  REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES   REFERENCE NO. 214 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 6 
for administration of emergency medical services in a county. 
 
Medical Director: The Medical Director of the local emergency medical services agency.  
 
Model Disciplinary Orders (MDO): The Recommended Guidelines for Disciplinary Orders and 
Conditions of Probation for EMT’s and Paramedics developed by the State EMS Authority to 
provide consistent and equitable discipline in cases dealing with disciplinary cause. 
 
Relevant Employer: Ambulance providers permitted by the Department of the California 
Highway Patrol or a public safety agency, that the certificate holder works for, or was working for 
at the time of the incident under review, as a paid employee or a volunteer. 
 
Valid, Validate, or Validation: Verification, within reasonable certainty, that a violation of Health 
and Safety Code Section 1798.200 may have occurred and that said violation may be reason for 
disciplinary cause. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Base hospital and provider agencies shall prepare and forward a written report within 
three working days to the EMS Agency Medical Director regarding any action of 
certificated or licensed prehospital personnel which may constitute a violation under 
Section 1798.200 (c) of the Health and Safety Code as listed in Section II. Any other 
items of concern resulting from an apparent deficiency of patient care should also be 
reported. 
 
A. The report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the prehospital 
provider agency or base hospital and must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
 
1. Names and certification/license numbers of all EMS personnel involved in 
the incident. 
 
2. Date, time, and location of the incident. 
 
3. A written summary of the alleged facts related to of the incident. 
 
4. The Health and Safety Code violation listed under 1798.200. 
 
5. A copy of the EMS Report Form, if applicable. 
 
6. A copy of the Base Hospital Report Form and base hospital audio 
recording, if applicable. 
 
B. Any report made to the local EMS Agency shall be copied to the employer of the 
affected individual. 
 
II. Any of the following actions, listed under the Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, 
Section 1798.200 (c), by EMS personnel shall be considered evidence of a threat to the 
public health and safety and, if found to be true, may result in probation, denial, 
suspension, or revocation of a certificate or license issued under Division 2.5: 
 
A. Fraud in the procurement of a certificate or licensure 

SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY 
  REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES   REFERENCE NO. 214 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 6 
 
B. Gross negligence 
 
C. Repeated negligent acts 
 
D. Incompetence 
 
E. The commission of any fraudulent, dishonest, or corrupt act which is substantially 
related to the qualifications, functions, and duties of prehospital personnel. 
 
F. Conviction of any crime which is substantially related to the qualifications, 
functions, and duties of prehospital personnel. The record of conviction or certified 
copy of the record shall be conclusive evidence of the conviction. 
 
G. Violation or attempting to violate directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting the 
violation of, or conspiring to violate, any provision of  of Health and Safety Code 
Division 2.5 or the regulations adopted by the EMS Authority pertaining to 
prehospital personnel. 
 
H. Violating or attempting to violate any federal or state statute or regulation which 
regulates narcotics, dangerous drugs, or controlled substance. 
 
I. Addiction to, the excessive use of, or the misuse of, alcoholic beverages, 
narcotics, dangerous drugs, or controlled substances. 
 
J. Functioning outside the supervision of medical control in the field care system 
operating at the local level, except as authorized by any other license or 
certification. 
 
K. Demonstration of irrational behavior or occurrence of a physical disability to; the 
extent that a reasonable and prudent person would have reasonable cause to 
believe that the ability to perform the duties normally expected may be impaired. 
 
L. Unprofessional conduct exhibited by any of the following: 
 
1. The mistreatment or physical abuse of any patient resulting from force in 
excess of what a reasonable and prudent person trained and acting in a 
similar capacity while engaged in the performance of his or her duties 
would use if confronted with a similar circumstance. Nothing in this section 
shall be deemed to prohibit an EMT, Advanced EMT, or Paramedic from 
assisting a peace officer, or a peace officer who is acting in the dual 
capacity of peace officer and EMT, Advanced EMT, or Paramedic, from 
using force that is reasonably necessary to affect a lawful arrest or 
detention. 
 
2. The failure to maintain confidentiality of patient medical information, except 
as disclosure is otherwise permitted or required by law in Sections 56 to 
56.6, inclusive, of the Civil Code. 
 
3. The commission of any sexually related offense specified under Section 
290 of the Penal Code. 

SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY 
  REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES   REFERENCE NO. 214 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 6 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
I. BASE HOSPITAL RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
A. MICN Personnel 
 
1. May conduct investigations to determine disciplinary cause, and may 
suspend privileges during the period of investigation. 
 
2. May request that the LEMSA conduct the investigation to determine 
disciplinary cause. 
 
3. Shall notify the LEMSA Medical Director in writing that the alleged action 
occurred within three (3) working days after an allegation has been 
validated as potential for disciplinary cause. 
 
4. Upon determination of disciplinary cause, the respective Prehospital Care 
Coordinator (PCC), in collaboration with the Base Hospital Medical 
Director, may develop and implement a disciplinary plan. Disciplinary plans 
shall be signed and dated by the authorized representative of the base 
hospital. 
 
a. The disciplinary plan, along with the relevant findings of the 
investigation related to disciplinary cause, shall be submitted to the 
EMS Agency Medical Director within three (3) working days of 
adoption of the disciplinary plan. 
 
b. The disciplinary plan may include a recommendation that the EMS 
Agency Medical Director consider taking action against the holder’s 
MICN certificate to include denial, suspension, revocation, or 
placement of a MICN certificate on probation. 
 
5. The respective PCC shall notify the LEMSA Medical Director in writing of 
the alleged action within three (3) working days of the occurrence of any of 
the following: 
 
a. The MICN is terminated or suspended for a disciplinary cause; 
 
b. The MICN resigns or retires following notification of an impending 
investigation based upon evidence that would indicate the 
existence of a disciplinary cause; or 
 
c. The MICN is removed from their related duties for a disciplinary 
cause after the completion of the employer’s investigation. 
 
II. PROVIDER AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
A. EMT Personnel 
 
1. May conduct investigations, to determine disciplinary cause, and may 

SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY 
  REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES   REFERENCE NO. 214 
 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 6 
suspend privileges during the period of investigation.  
 
2. May request that the LEMSA conduct the investigation to determine 
disciplinary cause. 
 
3. Upon determination of disciplinary cause, the respective provider agency 
authorized reporting entity, in collaboration with the Provider Agency 
Medical Director, may develop and implement a disciplinary plan in 
accordance with the MDOs. 
 
a. The relevant employer shall submit that disciplinary plan along with 
the relevant findings of the investigation related to disciplinary 
cause to the LEMSA that issued the certificate, within three (3) 
working days of adoption of the disciplinary plan. In the case 
where the certificate was issued by a non-LEMSA certifying entity, 
the disciplinary plan shall be submitted to the LEMSA that has 
jurisdiction in the county in which the headquarters of the certifying 
entity is located. 
 
b. The employer’s disciplinary plan may include a recommendation 
that the LEMSA Medical Director consider taking action against the 
holder’s certificate to include denial, suspension, revocation, or 
placement of a certificate on probation. 
 
4. The respective Provider Agency shall notify the LEMSA Medical Director in 
writing that has jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged action 
occurred within three (3) working days after an allegation has been 
validated as potential for disciplinary cause. 
 
5. The respective Provider Agency shall notify the LEMSA Medical Director 
that has jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged action occurred 
within three (3) working days or the occurrence of any of the following: 
 
a. The EMT is terminated or suspended for a disciplinary cause; 
 
b. The EMT resigns or retires following notification of an impending 
investigation based upon evidence that would indicate the 
existence of a disciplinary cause; or 
 
c. The EMT is removed from their related duties for a disciplinary 
cause after the completion of the employer’s investigation. 
 
6. Disciplinary plans shall be signed and dated by an authorized 
representative of the provider agency. 
 
B. Paramedic Personnel 
 
1. Paramedic employers shall report in writing to the LEMSA Medical Director 
and the EMS Authority and provide all supporting documentation within 30 
days of whenever the following actions are taken: 
 

SUBJECT: BASE HOSPITAL AND PROVIDER AGENCY 
  REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES   REFERENCE NO. 214 
 
 
 
PAGE 6 OF 6 
a. A paramedic is terminated or suspended for disciplinary cause or 
reason. 
 
b. A paramedic resigns following notice of an impending investigation 
based upon evidence indicating disciplinary cause or reason. 
 
c. A paramedic is removed from paramedic duties for disciplinary 
cause or reason. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 201,  Medical Management of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 304,  Paramedic Base Hospital Standards 
Ref. No. 1014, Emergency Medical Technician Certification
