# 206100 1221

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ELECTROCUTION Ref. No. 1221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
1. Ensure source of electricity is turned off ❶ 
 
2. Assess airway and initiate basic and/or advanced airway maneuvers prn (MCG 1302) 
 
3. For cardiac arrest, treat per TP 1210 Cardiac Arrest ❷ 
 
4. Administer Oxygen prn (MCG 1302)  
 
5. Initiate cardiac monitoring (MCG 1308) 
Perform 12-Lead ECG prn  
If cardiac dysrhythmia present, treat in conjunction with TP 1212, Bradycardia or TP 1213, 
Tachycardia ❸ 
 
6. Assess for signs of trauma  
If traumatic injury suspected, treat in conjunction with TP 1244, Traumatic Injury  
 
7. Remove jewelry and clothing from involved areas 
 
8. Establish vascular access prn (MCG 1375) 
 
9. For burns, treat in conjunction with TP 1220, Burns 
Cover affected areas with dry dressing or sheet ❹ 
 
10. For poor perfusion (MCG 1355): 
Normal Saline 1L IV rapid infusion  
Reassess after each 250 mL increment for evidence of volume overload (pulmonary edema); 
stop infusion if pulmonary edema develops 
 
For persistent poor perfusion, treat in conjunction with TP 1207, Shock/Hypotension 
 
11. For pain management: refer to MCG 1345, Pain Management 
 
12. For nausea or vomiting:  
Ondansetron 4mg ODT/IV/IM, may repeat x1 in 15 min prn 
 
  

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
Treatment Protocol: ELECTROCUTION Ref. No. 1221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISED:07-01-24 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
❶    Do not touch the patient unless you have removed the source of the electricity. An electrical current 
can be conducted through water and skin. Ensure that area surrounding the patient is dry before 
approaching him/her.  
 
 
 ❷   For young, healthy patients, especially in lightning injuries, consider prolonged cardio-pulmonary 
resuscitation.  
 
❸    Electrocution may result in ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, asystole or other 
dysrhythmias. However, if the patient is in a regular rhythm on evaluation, they are unlikely to 
develop a dysrhythmia. 
 
❹    Superficial skin findings do not correlate with the severity of an electrical burn. As the electrical 
current passes through tissue, it can cause more damage than is superficially present.
