# 206268 520

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS FROM (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
 CATALINA ISLAND  REFERENCE NO. 520 
 
EFFECTIVE: 05-01-92  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 01-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 12-01-17 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure that 9-1-1 patients located on Catalina Island are transported to the 
most appropriate facility staffed, equipped, and prepared for their medical 
emergency. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Div. 2.5, Sections 1797.204, 1797.220, 1798.2, 
1798.101(b)(1) 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22. Section 100276, et seq. 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 70649  
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Emergency Medical Condition: Condition in which the absence of immediate medical attention 
could reasonably be expected to result in serious jeopardy to a patient’s health, bodily function 
impairment, or serious dysfunction of any body organ or part. For the purposes of this policy, 
this includes women in labor. 
 
Interfacility Transfer (IFT): The transfer of a patient from a licensed health facility to another 
licensed health facility. For the purposes of this policy, transport options for IFTs involve the use 
of EMS transport vehicles. 
 
Standby Emergency Medical Service, Physician on Call: Medical care provided in a 
specifically designated area of the hospital which is equipped and maintained at all times to 
receive patients with urgent medical problems and capable of providing physician service within 
a reasonable time. 
 
9-1-1 Response: The physical response of an EMS provider due to activation of the EMS 
system with a request for medical evaluation. For purposes of this policy, this includes 
emergency responses to the field, licensed healthcare facility, a physician’s office, or clinic. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Emergency medical services (EMS) procedures on Catalina Island have been modified 
to accommodate the island’s limited medical and transport options, its unique geography, 
and distance from the mainland; nevertheless, the interfacility transfer of    patients from 
Catalina Island Medical Center (AHM) shall comply with current EMTALA and Title 22 
transfer laws and regulations for both sending and receiving hospitals. 
 
2. AHM, the only available medical facility on the island, is licensed as a standby 
emergency medicine service. Emergency, inpatient, and diagnostic services are limited 
and there are no obstetrical or surgical services. 
 
  

SUBJECT: TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS FROM 
 CATALINA ISLAND  REFERENCE NO. 520 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
3. AHM is not easily accessible from other areas of the island, for example, travel time from 
the Isthmus to Avalon is approximately 45-60 minutes by boat or ground transport. 
 
4. Air transport is the preferred means for transporting critical patients off the island and 
may be limited by weather and availability. 
 
5. Boat transport is an option if an air ambulance is unavailable, but like aircraft, weather 
may be a limiting factor. Paramedics, in consultation with the base hospital, shall 
determine if   a boat will be used instead of an air ambulance. 
 
6. Transportation arrangements for interfacility transfers (IFTs) from AHM are the 
responsibility of AHM. The appropriate transport modality should be made in consultation 
with the receiving hospital, which may include the utilization of 9-1-1 transport providers. 
AHM will make arrangements with the receiving hospital’s physician to accept the patient 
prior to the transfer. These arrangements may be accomplished through one of the 
paramedic base hospitals. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. 9-1-1 Responses 
 
A. Paramedic personnel, in consultation with the base hospital, shall determine 
whether an emergency medical condition exists which requires immediate 
transport to a 9-1-1 receiving facility. If such a condition exists, air transportation 
shall be requested. 
 
B. If it is determined that the ETA for air transportation is prolonged, or the patient’s 
condition precludes management in the field, prehospital personnel may opt to 
transport the patient to AHM to stabilize the patient while awaiting air 
transportation. Under these circumstances AHM is obligated to comply with Title 
22 and EMTALA transfer laws. The transport and destination arrangements 
already made by the paramedics in consultation with the base hospital should be 
utilized to expedite the transfer of the patient. The paramedics should remain with 
the patient and assist AHM personnel until care can be transferred to the medical 
personnel accompanying the patient to the mainland. 
 
C. There is no back-up paramedic capability on Catalina Island. If paramedics get 
another 9-1-1 call while assisting AHM personnel as described in Policy 1.B., all 
patient care shall be assumed by AHM personnel. AHM should provide updated 
verbal report(s) to the receiving hospital. 
 
D. If paramedics or the base hospital determine a patient does not have an 
emergency medical condition or need air transport, but the AHM physician 
concludes otherwise, the 9-1-1 system should be activated, and 9-1-1 air 
transport should be initiated. 
 
Prior to transport, the sending physician will make arrangements/acceptance for 
the transfer of the patient with the receiving physician. 
 
E. In the event a patient arrives at AHM by private transportation, the examining 
physician has evaluated and stabilized the patient to the best extent possible and 

SUBJECT: TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS FROM 
 CATALINA ISLAND  REFERENCE NO. 520 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
determines the patient’s condition warrants immediate transport, the 9-1-1 
system should be activated, 9-1-1 air transport should be initiated, and 
arrangements for the transfer have been made with an accepting physician. In 
such instances, paramedics must establish base hospital contact with their 
assigned base hospital when medical direction for advanced life support (ALS) 
procedures is required. If the base hospital physician or mobile intensive care 
nurse (MICN) has questions about the patient care provided prior to transport, 
they should speak directly with the AHM physician. 
 
F. EMS personnel shall request an air ambulance in accordance with their agency’s 
policies and procedures. It may be necessary for the base hospital to facilitate 
communication between paramedics and air ambulance dispatch. Paramedics on 
scene, in collaboration with the base hospital, may ask Command and Control to 
dispatch a specific resource based on patient need or scene circumstances. 
 
A 9-1-1 air transport request shall be initiated as follows: 
 
Los Angeles County Fire Department Command and Control will determine if   a 
helicopter can be dispatched from one of the following (not necessarily in this 
order): 
 
1. Los Angeles County Fire Department (2 paramedics) 
2. Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department (2 paramedics) 
3. Los Angeles City Fire Department (2 paramedics) 
4. Mercy Air (1 nurse, 1 paramedic, other medical personnel as appropriate) 
5. Reach Air (1 nurse, 1 paramedic, other medical personnel as appropriate) 
6. U.S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue (rescue swimmer*) 
 
*If unable to accommodate a Los Angeles County paramedic to accompany 
the patient to the receiving facility, the paramedic handling the call may 
transfer care to the U.S. Coast Guard. 
 
Additionally, Baywatch Avalon should be consulted if Mercy/Reach is not 
available or declines the call. 
 
It is extremely important that the Catalina Island paramedics be apprised of 
transportation arrangements as soon as possible to facilitate patient care. 
 
G. EMS personnel may request boat transport if   an air ambulance is not available 
and weather permits. Base hospital contact may be needed to facilitate 
communication between paramedics and boat dispatch. Paramedics on scene, in 
collaboration with the base hospital, may ask Command and Control to dispatch 
a specific resource based on patient need or scene circumstances. 
 
A 9-1-1 boat transport request shall be initiated as follows: 
 
1. Los Angeles County Fire Department Command and Control will 
determine if a boat can be dispatched from one of the following (not 
necessarily in this order): 
 
a. Los Angeles County Fire Department (2 paramedics) 

SUBJECT: TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS FROM 
 CATALINA ISLAND  REFERENCE NO. 520 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
b. Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department (2 paramedics) 
c. Long Beach Fire Department (3 paramedics) 
 
2. Paramedics who transport patients from Catalina Island into another 
provider agency’s jurisdiction on the mainland must contact that provider 
agency’s dispatch center for notification and dispatch the appropriate 
advanced or basic life support transport. 
 
II. IFT Transportation Options 
 
A. 9-1-1 Response: 
 
The jurisdictional 9-1-1 provider agency may be contacted when the AHM 
physician has evaluated and stabilized the patient to the extent possible and 
determines the patient’s emergency medical condition warrants immediate 
transport. 
 
B. Private Air Ambulance Provider or Medical Alert Center: 
 
1. If appropriate transfer arrangements have been made, AHM may contact 
either a private air ambulance provider directly or the Medical Alert Center 
(MAC) and request air transport for an IFT. AHM and/or the MAC shall 
make every effort to notify the air ambulance provider of the acuity of the 
call when requesting air transport. At minimum, the following information 
will be provided: 
 
a. Patient’s name 
b. Diagnosis 
c. Vital signs 
d. Pertinent medical history 
e. Any therapy required or in progress (MAC must consider scope- 
of-practice issues) 
f. Patient destination 
g. Payer source (if  any) 
 
2. Contact the MAC to determine if an air ambulance can be dispatched 
from one of the following (in this order): 
 
a. Private air ambulance provider** 
b. Los Angeles County Fire Department Command and Control 
c. Los Angeles Fire Department Operations Control Dispatch 
 
**If a private air ambulance provider is requested to do an IFT, payer 
source may be a factor in determining whether they will respond. 
 
The MAC will provide Los Angeles County Command and Control 
with a report detailing the process/rationale used to determine 
which air ambulance was utilized. 
 
3. AHM shall make every effort to facilitate an IFT through a private air 
ambulance provider. Use of public providers for IFT transports should be 

SUBJECT: TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS FROM 
 CATALINA ISLAND  REFERENCE NO. 520 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
considered as a last resort. 
 
4. If requested by the provider agency, AHM shall make every effort to meet 
the air ambulance at the helipad with the patient to expedite 
transportation. 
 
III. Non-emergency Patient Transportation 
 
Ambulatory patients who do not have an emergency medical condition and require no 
medical assistance or monitoring enroute but are instructed to seek further medical care 
on the mainland, may be transported by private transport, commercial boat, or helicopter 
service. Such patients would be equivalent to patients on the mainland who are released 
at scene or instructed to seek medical care via private transportation. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 418, Authorization and Classification of EMS Aircraft 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 514, Prehospital EMS Aircraft Operations 
Ref. No. 816, Physician at the Scene 
Ref. No. 520.1, Catalina Island Transfer Process/Algorithm
