# 206254 51309 01 15

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES   
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
  (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: ST-ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (STEMI)  REFERENCE NO. 513 
 PATIENT DESTINATION  
 
EFFECTIVE: 05-15-06  PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED:  07-01-25 
SUPERCEDES: 01-01-23 
 
 
APPROVED: __________________________ ____________________________ 
 Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure that 9-1-1 patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)  
are transported to the most appropriate facility that is staffed, equipped, and 
prepared to administer emergency and/or definitive care appropriate to the needs 
of a STEMI patient. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections, 1798  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI): An acute myocardial infarction that generates 
ST-segment elevation on the prehospital 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
STEMI Receiving Center (SRC): A facility licensed for a cardiac catheterization laboratory and 
cardiovascular surgery by the Department of Public Health, Health Facilities Inspection Division, 
and approved by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency as a SRC. 
 
PRINCIPLES:  
 
1. STEMI is a clinical diagnosis that is made based on the patient’s presentation and the 
presence of ST-elevation on the electrocardiogram (ECG). The 12-lead ECG in the 
prehospital care setting plays a key role in determining the most appropriate treatment 
and destination for patients with suspected cardiac symptoms. 
 
2. In all cases, the health and wellbeing of the patient is the overriding consideration in 
determining patient destination. Factors to be considered include: clinical presentation, 
severity, and stability of the patient’s condition; current status of the SRC; anticipation of 
transport time; and request by the patient, family, guardian, or physician. 
 
3. Prehospital identification and communication of STEMI can reduce critical “door-to-
intervention” times for STEMI patients. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. A prehospital 12-lead ECG should be performed in accordance with the Ref. No. 1308, 
Cardiac Monitoring/12-lead ECG Medical Control Guideline. 
 
II. If the 12-lead ECG demonstrates STEMI (or manufacturer’s equivalent) and this is 
consistent with the paramedic interpretation and/or the clinical presentation of the 
patient, transmit the 12-lead ECG directly to the receiving SRC. The provider impression 
is Chest Pain – STEMI (CPMI). 
 
III. For any patient with a software interpretation of STEMI on the 12-lead ECG where the 
paramedic provider impression differs or is uncertain, base contact should be 
 

SUBJECT: ST-ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (STEMI)        REFERENCE NO. 513 
 PATIENT DESTINATION   
  
           PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
established to clarify the provider impression and to determine the destination, including 
whether transport to the SRC is required. 
 
IV. In general, patients with a provider impression of Chest Pain – STEMI (CPMI), (including 
hypotensive patients with signs and symptoms consistent with cardiogenic shock) shall 
be transported to the most accessible open SRC if ground transport is 30 minutes or 
less regardless of service area boundaries. 
 
V. Paramedics shall notify the receiving SRC and discuss catheterization (cath) lab 
activation criteria for all patients with a provider impression of Chest Pain – STEMI 
(CPMI), including 9-1-1 interfacility transports of patients with a STEMI 12-lead ECG 
from a non-SRC ED to an SRC. 
 
VI. Provide properly labeled, at a minimum patient name and sequence number, 12-lead 
ECGs to the receiving facility (in either paper or electronic format) as part of the patient’s 
prehospital medical record. 
 
VII. Document the findings of the 12-lead ECG on the Patient Care Record. 
 
VIII.  STEMI patients should be transported to the most accessible SRC regardless of ED 
Diversion status. 
 
IX. If ground transport time to any SRC is greater than 30 minutes, the patient shall be 
transported to the most accessible receiving facility. 
 
X. If the closest SRC has requested STEMI Diversion (as per Ref. No. 503), STEMI 
patients, including STEMI patients complicated by out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) 
should be transported to the next most accessible open SRC if ground transport time is 
less than 30 minutes. 
 
XI. Interfacility Transfer of STEMI patients from a STEMI Referral Facility (SRF) Emergency 
Department to a SRC via the 9-1-1 system: SRFs are strongly encouraged to enter into 
interfacility transfer agreements with the most accessible SRC (See Ref. No. 320.2). 
 
A.  Patients are to be transported to the SRC as directed by the SRF physician 
(base hospital contact/notification guidelines apply). 
 
B. Transport units may bypass the most accessible SRC to the prearranged 
receiving SRC within 30 minutes, if the EMS provider resources at the time of 
transport allow. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 501,  Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 502,  Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 503,  Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Units 
Ref. No. 506,  Trauma Triage  
Ref. No. 513.1, Interfacility Transport of the ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction Patient 
Ref. No. 516,  Cardiac Arrest Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 517,  Private Provider Agency Transport/Response Guidelines 

SUBJECT: ST-ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (STEMI)        REFERENCE NO. 513 
 PATIENT DESTINATION   
  
           PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
Ref. No. 1210, Cardiac Arrest 
Ref. No. 1211, Cardiac Chest Pain 
Ref. No. 1212, Cardiac Dysrhythmia – Bradycardia 
Ref. No. 1213, Cardiac Dysrhythmia – Tachycardia 
Ref. No. 1303, Cath Lab Activation Algorithm 
Ref. No. 1308, Cardiac Monitoring/12-Lead ECG
