# 206211 4166 30 15

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT UNIT REFERENCE NO. 416 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-05-88        PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 06-01-18 
 
  
APPROVED: ______________________  _________________________________ 
     Director, EMS Agency          Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide a mechanism for approved primary provider agencies in Los Angeles 
County to provide early assessment and initial lifesaving therapy to patients by a 
paramedic prior to the arrival of an ALS unit. 
 
DEFINITION: An Assessment Unit (AU) is an emergency response unit utilized by an approved 
primary provider agency which complies with the operational criteria outlined in 
this policy. 
 
PRINCIPLE: AUs may be used only by approved paramedic provider agencies or primary 
provider agencies that contract with an approved paramedic provider. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Assessment Unit Approval 
 
A. The provider agency shall submit a request for approval, in writing, to the 
Director of the Los Angeles County EMS Agency. The request must include the 
following: 
 
1. Description of need 
 
2. Assigned geographical area of proposed AU 
 
3. Identification, location, and average response times of the ALS Unit 
assigned to the geographic area 
 
4. Proposed identification and location of AU, include whether the unit will 
be designated as full-time (24 hours 7 days a week) or part-time (based 
on staff availability) 
 
5. Description of AU staffing 
 
6. A statement indicating whether an approved paramedic radio and/or 
alternative mechanism to establish base hospital contact will be included 
in the inventory 
 
7. A mechanism for direct field observation by the EMS Agency and base 
hospital personnel 
 
8. Desired implementation date 
 

SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT UNIT REFERENCE NO. 416 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
 
B. The EMS Agency will: 
 
1. Assign the proposed unit(s) to a base hospital 
 
2. Perform an inventory, as outlined in Ref. No. 704, Assessment Unit 
Inventory, of the proposed AU(s) 
 
3. Conduct a brief orientation for department personnel, reviewing the 
staffing and operational requirements outlined in this policy 
 
4. Submit a written response to the requesting provider agency within five 
(5) working days after the inventory is successfully completed, to approve 
or deny the proposed AU(s) 
 
II. Staffing/Equipment Requirements 
 
A. Staffing, at a minimum, shall include one paramedic accredited in Los Angeles 
County and one EMT certified in the State of California 
 
B. AUs shall be equipped with standardized inventory specified in Ref. No. 704, 
Assessment Unit Inventory. This equipment must be secured for use by AU 
paramedic personnel only 
 
III. Operational Requirements 
 
A. For ALS patient responses, the closest available ALS Unit shall be dispatched 
simultaneously with an AU 
 
B. If the AU arrives on scene prior to the ALS Unit, the paramedic shall: 
 
1. Assess the patient 
 
2. Institute basic life support and first aid procedures if indicated 
 
3. Institute patient care as per Ref. No.  1200, Treatment Protocols, et al. 
 
4. Transfer care of patients to paramedics on the ALS Unit upon their arrival; 
assist as needed 
 
5. Cancel ALS Unit if ALS services are not required 
 
C. An ALS Unit should never be canceled by an AU if the patient meets criteria for 
Base Hospital Contact or Receiving Hospital Notification as listed in Ref. No. 
1200.1 Treatment Protocols General Instructions and/or upon assessment, is 
determined to require ALS intervention or ALS monitoring for potential 
deterioration. 
 
EXCEPTIONS: 
 
1. If emergency ambulance transportation (ground or air) is on scene prior to 
the arrival of the ALS Unit AND the patient’s condition warrants 

SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT UNIT REFERENCE NO. 416 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
 
immediate rapid transport, transportation should NOT be delayed to await 
the arrival of the ALS Unit (e.g., major trauma). 
 
In such instances, the AU paramedic or paramedics in the transportation 
vehicle should accompany the patient to the hospital. The base hospital 
shall be contacted en route. (The base hospital will contact the receiving 
hospital.) When, for whatever reason, base hospital contact cannot be 
made, the destination of patients will be made by the paramedic in 
accordance with Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination. 
 
2. If the patient is refusing care and transport and the paramedic is able to 
establish communications with the base hospital to document AMA, the 
ALS Unit may be canceled. 
 
D. Assessment Unit Deployed with Strike Teams: 
 
1. The AU’s primary responsibility is providing assessment and treatment of 
strike team members in the absence of a FireLine EMT-Paramedic in 
congruence with the Incident Medical Plan. 
 
2. While emergency medical care for civilians (general public) is still the 
responsibility of the local EMS system and or the Incident’s Medical 
Group, it is appropriate for the AU paramedic to provide emergency 
medical care to injured civilians encountered during a strike team 
assignment. 
 
3. The AU paramedic shall notify the Medical Alert Center at (866) 940-4401 
at the time of their deployment and demobilization. 
 
4. The AU paramedic shall complete a Patient Care Record for every patient 
encounter during the deployment. The completed Patient Care Record 
shall be submitted to the Los Angeles County EMS Agency and a copy to 
the jurisdictional EMS Agency at the conclusion of the deployment. 
 
5. The AU paramedic will function within the Los Angeles County paramedic 
scope of practice and Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al, and Ref. 
No. 1300, Medical Control Guidelines. 
 
E. Each AU will be assigned to a base hospital. The base hospital shall provide all 
services normally offered to assigned ALS Units.  
 
IV. Monitoring/Evaluation Requirements 
 
The provider agency must provide: 
 
A. A mechanism for direct field observation of the AU by EMS Agency and base 
hospital personnel. 
 
B. A mechanism to educate EMS personnel on appropriate required documentation, 
to include identification of the Unit as ALS (when unit is staffed with a paramedic) 
or BLS (when paramedic staffing is not available). 

SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT UNIT REFERENCE NO. 416 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
 
 
C. A mechanism to monitor appropriate required documentation as part of the 
provider agency’s quality improvement program that is auditable by the EMS 
Agency. 
 
V. Temporary Upgrade to an ALS Unit 
 
A. The temporary upgrade of an AU to an ALS Unit will be authorized for a period of 
no longer than 30 days. 
 
B. Temporary upgrades of AUs to ALS units will be based upon the availability of 
paramedic staffing and with the understanding that the upgraded units are to 
augment the provider agencies baseline number of ALS units, not as a 
replacement for an in-service front-line unit. 
 
C. In order to allow for a temporary unit upgrade, the AU must have previously been 
inventoried, approved and assigned to a Los Angeles County base hospital by 
the EMS Agency. 
 
D. Once upgraded, the ALS unit must comply with Ref. No. 408, ALS Unit staffing, 
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory, and Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on 
ALS Units. 
 
E. Controlled substances must be stored under a double locking mechanism on the 
upgraded unit and inventoried as outlined in Ref. No. 702. 
 
F. Upgrade process: 
 
1. Complete a unit inventory inspection in accordance with the most current 
Ref. No.703, to include a mechanism for the unit to establish base hospital 
contact and to ensure the security of controlled substances as outlined in 
Ref. No. 702. 
 
2. Station administrative staff (Captain or Battalion Chief level) must sign the 
Ref. No. 416.1, Temporary Upgrade of an Assessment Unit to an ALS Unit, 
attesting that all supplies/equipment are present on the unit and in good 
working order. 
 
3. Retain the original copy of the signed Ref. No. 416.1 form (or digitally 
signed form) within station files. 
 
4. Ensure that the unit is identified as a “paramedic” unit. 
 
G. Downgrade Process 
 
1. Complete a unit inventory inspection in accordance with Ref. No.704, 
Assessment Unit Inventory, ensuring that all equipment/supplies 
authorized for ALS units have been removed. 
 
2. Ensure controlled substances are removed and stored according to Ref. 
No. 702. 

SUBJECT: ASSESSMENT UNIT REFERENCE NO. 416 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
 
 
3. Station administrative staff (Captain or Battalion Chief level) must sign the 
Ref. No.416.2, Downgrade of an ALS Unit from Temporarily Upgraded 
Assessment Unit, attesting that all supplies/equipment consistent with the 
assessment unit level are the only supplies/equipment remaining on the 
apparatus. 
 
4. Retain the original copies of the signed Ref. No. 416.1 and 416.2 forms 
(or digitally signed forms) within station files. 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 304,  Paramedic Base Hospital Standards 
Ref. No. 408,  Advanced Life Support (ALS) Unit Staffing 
Ref. No. 416.1 Temporary Upgrade of an Assessment Unit to an ALS Unit 
Ref. No. 416.2 Downgrade of an ALS Unit from Temporarily Upgraded Assessment Unit 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 704, Assessment Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 804, Fireline Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic (FEMP) 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al. 
Ref. No. 1300, Medical Control Guidelines, et al.
