# 206229 50210 01 15

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES   
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  
           (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 502 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 07-20-84 PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED:   04-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
  
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure that 9-1-1 patients are transported to the most appropriate facility that 
is staffed, equipped, and prepared to administer emergency and/or definitive care 
appropriate to the needs of the patient. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 
California Administrative Code, Title 13, Section 1105 (c) 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. In the absence of decisive factors to the contrary, 9-1-1 patients shall be transported to 
the most accessible 9-1-1 receiving facility equipped, staffed, and prepared to receive 
emergency cases and administer emergency care appropriate to the needs of the 
patient. 
 
2. The most accessible receiving (MAR) facility may or may not be the closest facility 
geographically. Transport personnel shall take into consideration traffic, weather 
conditions, or other factors that may influence transport time in identifying the most 
accessible facility. 
 
3. The most appropriate receiving facility for a patient may be the health facility which is 
affiliated with their health plan. Depending upon the patient’s chief complaint and 
medical history, it may be in the patient’s best interest to be transported to their ‘medical 
home’, as defined by their health plan, personal physician, and/or medical records. 
 
4. Patients shall not be transported to a medical facility that is on diversion due to internal 
disaster. 
 
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this reference, and in accordance with Ref. No. 
503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS/BLS Patients, final authority 
for patient destination rests with the base hospital handling the call. Base hospitals shall 
honor diversion requests based on patient condition and available system resources.  
9-1-1 patients shall ordinarily be transported to general acute care hospitals with a basic 
emergency department permit. Transport to other medical facilities (hospitals with a 
stand-by permit, clinics and other medical facilities approved by the EMS Agency) shall 
be performed only in accordance with this policy. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Transport of Patients by EMT Personnel 
 
A. EMT personnel shall transport 9-1-1 patients deemed stable and requiring only 
basic life support (BLS) to the MAR (exception: BLS Diversion or Internal 
Disaster).   

SUBJECT: PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 502 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
B. If the MAR has requested BLS diversion as per Ref. 503, the patient may be 
diverted to an alternate facility assuming the involved BLS unit estimates that it 
can reach an alternate facility within fifteen (15) minutes from the incident 
location.  If there are no open facilities within this time frame, BLS patients shall 
be directed to the MAR, regardless of its diversion status (exception: Internal 
Disaster). 
 
C. EMT personnel may honor patient requests to be transported to other than the 
MAR provided that the patient is deemed stable, requires basic life support 
measures only, and the ambulance is not unreasonably removed from its primary 
area of response. In order to facilitate this, EMT personnel may transfer care of a 
patient to another EMT team if necessary. 
 
D.  In life-threatening situations (e.g., unmanageable airway or uncontrollable 
 hemorrhage) in which the estimated time of arrival (ETA) of the paramedics 
 exceeds the ETA to the MAR, EMTs should exercise their clinical judgment as to 
 whether it is in the patient’s best interest to be transported prior to the arrival of 
 paramedics. 
 
E. EMT personnel may immediately transport hypotensive trauma patients with life-
threatening, penetrating injuries to the torso to the closest trauma center, not the 
MAR, when the transport time is less than the estimated time of paramedic 
arrival.  The transporting unit should make every effort to contact the receiving 
trauma center while in route. 
 
II. Transport of Patients by Paramedic Personnel 
 
A. Patients should be transported to the MAR unless: 
 
1. The base hospital determines that another facility is more appropriate to 
meet the needs of the patient; or 
 
2. The patient meets criteria or guidelines for transport to a specialty care 
center (i.e., Trauma Center, Pediatric Trauma Center, ST-Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction Receiving Center, Emergency Department 
Approved for Pediatrics, Pediatric Medical Center, Perinatal Center, 
Sexual Assault Response Team Center, or Designated Stroke Center); 
 
3. The patient requests a specific hospital; and 
 
a. The patient’s condition is considered sufficiently stable to tolerate 
additional transport time; and 
 
b. The requested hospital can provide services appropriate to the 
patient’s chief complaint; and 
 
c. The EMS provider has determined that such a transport would not 
unreasonably remove the unit from its primary area of response.  
If the provider is unable to honor the request, and the patient 
therefore refuses to be transported, the provider should attempt to 
arrange for alternate transportation (i.e., private ambulance), in 
order to assist patient with receiving necessary treatment. 

SUBJECT: PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 502 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
 
4. The MAR has requested diversion of 9-1-1 patients requiring advanced 
life support (ALS) as specified in Ref. No. 503. ALS patients may be 
directed to an alternate open facility provided: 
 
a. The patient does not exhibit an unmanageable airway or 
uncontrolled hemorrhage. 
 
b. The involved ALS unit estimates that it can reach an alternate 
facility within fifteen (15) minutes, Code 3, from the incident 
location.  If there are no open facilities within this time frame, ALS 
patients shall be directed to the MAR, regardless of its diversion 
status (exception: Internal Disaster). 
 
B. Paramedic personnel may transfer care of a patient to another paramedic team if 
necessary.  If base hospital contact has been made, the initial paramedic team 
shall advise the base hospital that another paramedic team has assumed 
responsibility for the patient. 
 
lll. Destination of Restrained Patients 
 
A. Restrained patients shall be transported to the MAR within the guidelines of this 
policy.  Allowable exceptions: 
 
 1. Patients without a medical complaint, with a 5150 order written by a 
designated Department of Mental Health Team, when transport to a 
psychiatric facility has been arranged. 
 
 2. A law enforcement request for transport to medical facilities other than the 
closest may be honored with base hospital concurrence. 
 
IV. Transport to Hospitals or Medical Facilities that are Non 9-1-1 Receiving Facilities 
 
A. Patient requests for transport to hospitals that are not 9-1-1 Receiving Facilities 
may be honored by EMT or paramedic personnel provided: 
 
1. The patient, family, or private physician is made aware that the requested 
hospital is not a 9-1-1 receiving facility; 
 
2. The Base hospital or EMS provider contacts the requested facility and 
ensures that the hospital has agreed to accept the patient; 
 
3. If transport requires additional transport time, the patient’s condition is 
considered sufficiently stable to tolerate and the EMS provider has 
determined that such a transport would not unreasonably remove the unit 
from its primary area of response 
 
B. Other medical facilities approved on an individual basis by the EMS Agency: 
 
9-1-1 patients may be transported to medical facilities other than hospitals 
(i.e., clinics, etc.) only when approved in advance by the EMS Agency. 
 

SUBJECT: PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 502 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 501, Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS/BLS Patients 
Ref. No. 504, Trauma Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 508, Sexual Assault Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 508.1 SART Center Roster 
Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 511, Perinatal Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 512, Burn Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 513, ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 516, Cardiac Arrest Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 518, Decompression Emergencies/Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 521, Stroke Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 526, Behavioral/Psychiatric Crisis Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 528, Intoxicated (Alcohol) Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 838, Application of Patient Restraints
