# 206252 5122 28 15

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: BURN PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 512 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-05-79 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES:  07-01-23 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure the appropriate destination for Los Angeles County patients who 
sustain burn injuries. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Paramedics should make base contact for patients who sustain burn injuries that meet 
criteria for Base Contact in Ref. No. 1200.2. and Ref. No 506, Trauma Triage. 
 
 
II. Determine the destination of burn-injured patients as follows: 
 
A. Major / Critical Burns should be transported to the closest trauma center. If a 
recognized Burn Center, e.g., Los Angeles General Medical Center Torrance 
Memorial Medical Center, West Hills Hospital and Medical Center, is more 
accessible than the Trauma Center, patient should be transported to the recognized 
Burn Center: 
 
1. Adult patients (15 years of age or older) with 2
nd
 degree (partial thickness) 
and/or 3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving equal to or greater than 
20% of Total Body Surface Area (TBSA). 
 
2. Pediatric patients (14 years of age or younger) with 2
nd
 degree (partial 
thickness) and/or 3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving equal to or 
greater than 10% of TBSA. 
 
B. Patients who meet other trauma or Pediatric Medical Center (PMC) criteria 
and/or guidelines should be transported to the appropriate trauma center or 
PMC. 
 
C. Patients who do not meet criteria in Sections A or B above should be transported 
to the closest, most accessible medical receiving facility appropriate for their age. 
 
D. In multi-casualty incidents, see Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty 
Incidents, for destination. 
 
III. The receiving hospital should: 
 
A. Provide appropriate stabilization of the patient 
 
B. Arrange transfer to an appropriate burn center if necessary. Provide the burn 
center with the following information: 
 
1. Status of airway control 

SUBJECT: BURN PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 512 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
 
2. Percentage, degree, and location of the burns 
 
3. Type of burn (electrical, thermal, chemical, radiation)  
 
4. Level of care the patient requires (ICU, med/surg) 
 
5. Circulatory status (vital signs and perfusion of burned extremity if 
applicable) 
 
6. Level of consciousness 
 
7. Other injuries 
 
8. Past medical history, pre-existing major systemic disease, and current 
medications 
 
9. Treatment(s) already rendered and in progress 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al.
