# 206256 515

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  
 (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT:  AIR AMBULANCE TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 515 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 04-15-95 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 10-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE:  To ensure air ambulance transport is utilized appropriately and safely for critically 
ill and injured patients 
 
AUTHORITY:  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 8, 100289. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Appropriateness of air ambulance transport shall be determined by the primary EMS 
provider agency on scene. The first responder on scene should be responsible for the 
prompt request for dispatch of EMS aircraft, if needed. 
 
2. Air ambulance transport should be considered for critically ill or injured patients when 
there is extended ground transport time. Transport modality is determined, based on the 
estimated transport times, mode of transport available, or incident location so that the 
prolonged ground transport time does not put the patient at higher risk. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Critically ill or injured patients who are transported by air ambulance shall be transported 
to the most appropriate 9-1-1 receiving center with a licensed helipad, per destination 
policies, with the following considerations: 
 
A. All patient destinations with respect to air safety factors shall be approved by the 
pilot in command. 
 
B. Patients exhibiting an unmanageable airway should be transported to the most 
accessible receiving facility regardless of specialty need, if applicable. 
 
 
C. When critically ill or injured pediatric and adult patients are transported together 
in one aircraft, the receiving facility shall also be a Pediatric Medical Center or 
Pediatric Trauma Center. 
 
II. Communications 
 
A. Base hospital contact with the anticipated receiving facility should be made on all 
patients requiring air ambulance transport.  If the receiving facility is not a 
paramedic base hospital, the receiving facility should be notified of impending air 
ambulance transport by the EMS provider and base hospital contact will be made 
per protocol. 
 
 

SUBJECT:  AIR AMBULANCE TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 515 
 
           PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
B. In the event of communication failure with the base hospital, paramedics shall 
make every effort to contact the Medical Alert Center (MAC). MAC shall notify the 
receiving facility of the impending air ambulance transport. 
 
III. Quality Improvement 
 
A. The EMS Agency, base hospitals, receiving facilities, and provider agencies shall 
conduct regular review of all EMS air ambulance responses. 
 
B. Documentation on the EMS Report Form and Base Hospital Form should include 
an explanation for the use of an air ambulance (i.e., mountain rescue). 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS/BLS Patients 
Ref. No. 504, Trauma Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 510,  Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 511,  Perinatal Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 512,   Burn Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 513,  ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 518,  Decompression Emergencies/Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 521,  Stroke Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field 
Ref. No. 1302, Medical Control Guideline: Airway Management and Monitoring
