# 206257 516

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: CARDIAC ARREST (NON-TRAUMATIC) REFERENCE NO. 516 
 PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-01-12  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED:    07-01-25 
SUPERCEDES: 10-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: __________________________ _________________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure that 9-1-1 patients in cardiopulmonary arrest (non-traumatic) are 
transported to the most appropriate facility that is staffed, equipped, and 
prepared to perform resuscitative measures. 
 
This policy does not apply to traumatic arrest or to decompression 
emergencies. For traumatic arrest, refer to Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage. For 
decompression emergencies, refer to Ref. No. 518, Decompression 
Emergencies/Patient Destination. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections, 1798  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Cardiac Etiology: Sudden cardiac death from ischemic heart disease, congenital heart 
disease, channelopathy, or dysrhythmia. One presumes cardiac etiology when it is a sudden 
event without evidence of alternate causes (e.g. trauma, terminal illness, overdose, sepsis, 
drowning, or respiratory arrest). 
 
Extracorporeal Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (ECPR) Receiving Center: A licensed 
general acute care facility that is designated by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency as a 
STEMI Receiving Center, meets all the requirements listed in this policy and has been 
designated by the LA County EMS Agency as an ECPR receiving center. 
 
Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC): The restoration of a spontaneous perfusing 
rhythm. Signs of ROSC include: palpable pulse, breathing (more than an occasional gasp), a 
measurable blood pressure and/or a sudden rise in capnography to a normal/high reading. 
 
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI): An acute myocardial infarction that generates 
ST-segment elevation on the prehospital 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
STEMI Receiving Center (SRC): An acute care facility licensed for a cardiac catheterization 
laboratory and cardiovascular surgery by the California Department of Public Health and 
designated by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency as a SRC. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. In all cases, the health and well-being of the patient is the overriding consideration in 
determining patient destination. Factors to be considered include: clinical presentation, 
severity and stability of the patient’s condition; current status of the SRC; anticipation of 
transport time; and request by the patient, family, guardian or physician. 
 
2. Optimal post cardiac arrest treatment may include an interventional cardiac procedure in 
a significant percentage of patients. 

SUBJECT: CARDIAC ARREST (NON-TRAUMATIC) REFERENCE NO. 516 
 PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
 
3. Resuscitation efforts for patients greater than 14 years of age who are in non-traumatic 
cardiopulmonary arrest should take place in the field until ROSC is achieved or the 
patient is pronounced. Transport of patients without ROSC is discouraged with the 
exception of patients who meet ECPR criteria, and are transported on a mechanical 
compression device.  
 
4. For cardiac arrest in patients age 14 and younger, refer to Ref. No. 510, Pediatric 
Patient Destination. 
 
5. Patients with refractory ventricular fibrillation (3 or more shocks) or EMS witnessed 
arrests of presumed cardiac etiology may benefit from transport to the SRC for 
consideration of percutaneous coronary intervention despite prolonged resuscitation. 
 
6. Patients in cardiac arrest with hanging or submersion mechanisms are asphyxial in the 
large majority of cases and should be considered a medical cardiac arrest for field 
management and transport destination unless there is strong evidence of cervical spine 
injury.  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Establish base hospital contact for medical direction for all cardiac arrest patients who 
do not meet criteria for determination of death per Ref. No. 814, 
Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field. 
 
II. For patients with STEMI complicated by out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, direct contact with 
the receiving SRC shall be established for patient notification and/or to discuss cath lab 
activation criteria. 
 
III. Patients with non-traumatic cardiac arrest who meet ALL of the following criteria should 
be transported to the closest ECPR Receiving Center if ground transport is 30 minutes 
or less regardless of service area boundaries: 
 
A. Age ≥15 to ≤75 years old 
 
B. Mechanical compression device (MCD) is available and the patient’s body 
habitus can accommodate the use of the device 
 
C. Initial shockable rhythm with refractory or recurrent ventricular 
fibrillation/ventricular tachycardia OR presumed massive pulmonary embolus 
given clinical circumstances of the arrest 
 
D. Scene time can be limited to no more than 15 minutes (no system or patient 
factors that will significantly delay transport) 
 
E. The patient does NOT: have a do-not-resuscitate order, known terminal illness, 
or baseline severe neurologic dysfunction. 
 
IV. For transports to the ECPR receiving center, contact should be made directly with the 
receiving ECPR center as soon as possible while en route. 
 

SUBJECT: CARDIAC ARREST (NON-TRAUMATIC) REFERENCE NO. 516 
 PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
V. Patients with non-traumatic cardiac arrest who do not meet ECPR criteria shall be 
transported to the most accessible SRC if ground transport is 30 minutes or less 
regardless of service area boundaries including: 
 
A. Patients with sustained ROSC 
 
B. Patients with ROSC who re-arrest en route 
 
C. Patients with persistent cardiac arrest for whom the Base Physician determines 
transport is required, because futility is not met despite lack of ROSC with on 
scene resuscitation 
 
D. Patients transported on Base judgment for ECPR when the closest SRC is an 
ECPR receiving center 
 
E. Patients who have progressed into cardiopulmonary arrest while en route and 
had a pre-arrest STEMI 12-lead ECG. 
 
VI. For patients who deteriorate into out-of-hospital cardiac arrest while en route to the most 
assessible receiving facility (MAR), rerouting to the closest SRC should be considered 
when feasible based on available resources and estimated transport times. 
 
VII. Cardiac arrest patients should be transported to the most accessible SRC (and ECPR 
receiving center when applicable) regardless of ED Diversion status. 
 
VIII. If ground transport time to a SRC is greater than 30 minutes, the patient shall be 
transported to the MAR. 
 
VI. For ECPR patients: If the closest ECPR receiving center is on ECPR diversion AND 
there is another ECPR center available within a 30 minute transport, consideration 
should be made to route to the next open ECPR center if total time from cardiac arrest to 
that ECPR center is less than 60 minutes. If no open ECPR center is reachable within 
these time intervals, the patient shall be transported to the closest SRC regardless of 
ECPR status. 
 
VII. If the closest SRC has requested STEMI Diversion (as per Ref. No. 503), cardiac arrest 
patients with STEMI should be transported to the next most accessible open SRC if 
ground transport time is less than 30 minutes, otherwise transport will continue to the 
closest SRC. Cardiac arrest patients without STEMI should be routed to the closest SRC 
regardless of ED or STEMI Diversion status. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 501, Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Units 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 517, Private Provider Agency Transport/Response Guidelines 
Ref. No. 518, Decompression Emergencies/Patient Destination 

SUBJECT: CARDIAC ARREST (NON-TRAUMATIC) REFERENCE NO. 516 
 PATIENT DESTINATION 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field 
Ref. No. 1210, Cardiac Arrest 
Ref. No. 1303, Algorithm for Cath Lab Activation 
Ref. No. 1308, Cardiac Monitoring/12-Lead ECG
