# 206342 822 2

STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
BCIA 8572 
(Rev. 04/2017) 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
Page 1 of 2 
SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE REPORT 
 
REFERENCE NO. 822.2 
(Pursuant to Penal Code section 11166) 
 
To Be Completed by Mandated Child Abuse Reporters 
PLEASE PRINT OR TYPE 
 
 
CASE NAME:    
CASE NUMBER: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Print Form Clear Form 
A. 
REPORTING 
PARTY
 
NAME OF MANDATED REPORTER TITLE 
MANDATED REPORTER CATEGORY 
REPORTER'S BUSINESS/AGENCY NAME AND ADDRESS    Street City Zip 
DID MANDATED REPORTER WITNESS THE INCIDENT? 
  YES    NO 
REPORTER'S TELEPHONE (DAYTIME) SIGNATURE TODAY'S DATE 
B. 
REPORT 
NOTIFICATION
  LAW ENFORCEMENT   COUNTY PROBATION 
 COUNTY WELFARE / CPS (Child Protective Services) 
AGENCY 
ADDRESS Street City Zip DATE/TIME OF PHONE CALL 
OFFICIAL CONTACTED - NAME AND TITLE TELEPHONE 
C. VICTIM
 
One report per victim
 
NAME (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE) BIRTHDATE OR APPROX. AGE SEX ETHNICITY 
ADDRESS Street City Zip 
TELEPHONE 
PRESENT LOCATION OF VICTIM 
SCHOOL CLASS GRADE 
PHYSICALLY DISABLED? 
  YES    NO 
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED? 
  YES    NO 
OTHER DISABILITY (SPECIFY) PRIMARY LANGUAGE SPOKEN IN HOME 
IN FOSTER CARE? 
   YES 
  NO 
IF VICTIM WAS IN OUT-OF-HOME CARE AT TIME OF INCIDENT, CHECK TYPE OF CARE: 
   DAY CARE    CHILD CARE CENTER    FOSTER FAMILY HOME 
  FAMILY FRIEND    GROUP HOME OR INSTITUTION        RELATIVE'S HOME 
TYPE OF ABUSE (CHECK ONE OR MORE): 
  PHYSICAL   MENTAL 
  SEXUAL   NEGLECT 
 OTHER (SPECIFY)     
RELATIONSHIP TO SUSPECT 
PHOTOS TAKEN? 
   YES    NO 
DID THE INCIDENT RESULT IN THIS VICTIM'S 
DEATH? 
   YES    NO    UNK 
D. INVOLVED PARTIES
 
VICTIM'S 
SIBLINGS
 
NAME BIRTHDATE SEX ETHNICITY   NAME 
BIRTHDATE SEX ETHNICITY 
1.      
3.
 
2.   
4.
 
VICTIM'S
 
PARENTS/GUARDIANS
 
NAME (LAST, FIRST. MIDDLE) BIRTHDATE OR APPROX. AGE SEX 
ETHNICITY 
ADDRESS Street City Zip 
HOME PHONE BUSINESS PHONE 
NAME (LAST, FIRST. MIDDLE) 
BIRTHDATE OR APPROX. AGE 
SEX 
ETHNICITY 
ADDRESS Street City Zip 
HOME PHONE BUSINESS PHONE 
SUSPECT
 
SUSPECT'S NAME (LAST, FIRST. MIDDLE) BIRTHDATE OR APPROX. AGE SEX 
ETHNICITY 
ADDRESS Street City Zip 
TELEPHONE 
OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION 
E. 
INCIDENT INFORMAT
 
IF NECESSARY, ATTACH EXTRA SHEET(S) OR OTHER FORM(S) AND CHECK THIS BOX          IF MULTIPLE VICTIMS, INDICATE NUMBER: 
DATE/TIME OF INCIDENT 
PLACE OF INCIDENT 
NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION (What victim(s) said/what the mandated reporter observed/what person accompanying the victim(s) said/similar or past incident's involving the 
victim(s) or suspect) 
DO NOT submit a copy of this form to the Department of Justice (DOJ). The investigating agency is required under Penal Code section 11169 to submit to DOJ a 
Child Abuse or Severe Neglect Indexing Form BCIA 8583 if (1) an active investigation was conducted and (2) the incident was determined to be substantiated. 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-01   REVISED: 04-01-22   SUPERSEDES: 04-01-19
