# 206335 Ref.No.815 DNR POLST 2016 06 21

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES     
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT  REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
 END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-92  PAGE 1 OF 7 
REVISED: 07-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 09-01-21 
 
  
APPROVED:  ____________________    _________________________________ 
      Director, EMS Agency           Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To allow EMS personnel to honor valid Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders or 
Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) and other patient 
designated end-of-life directives in the field and act in accordance with the 
patient’s wishes when death appears imminent. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 1, Parts 1.8 and 1.85 
 California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 and 1798 
 California Probate Code, Division 4.7 (Health Care Decisions Law) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Advance Health Care Directive (AHCD): A written document that allows an individual to 
provide healthcare instructions and/or appoint an agent to make healthcare decisions when 
unable or prefer to have someone speak for them. AHCD is the legal format for healthcare 
proxy or durable power of attorney for healthcare and living will. 
 
Aid-in-Dying Drug: A drug determined and prescribed by a physician for a qualified individual, 
which the qualified individual may choose to self-administer to bring about his or her death due 
to terminal illness. The prescribed drug may take effect within minutes to several days after self-
administration. 
 
Basic Life Support (BLS) measures: The provision of treatment designed to maintain 
adequate circulation and ventilation for a patient in cardiac arrest without the use of drugs or 
special equipment. Examples include: 
 
• Assisted ventilation via a bag-mask device  
• Manual or automated chest compressions 
• Automated External Defibrillator (AED) – only if an EMT is on scene prior to the arrival of 
paramedics 
 
Comfort measures: Medical interventions used to provide and promote patient comfort. 
Comfort measures applicable to the End of Life Option Act may include airway positioning and 
suctioning. 
 
Do Not Resuscitate (DNR): DNR is a request to withhold interventions intended to restore 
cardiac activity and respirations. For example: 
 
• no chest compressions 
• no defibrillation 
• no endotracheal intubation 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 7 
• no assisted ventilation 
• no vasoactive drugs 
 
End of Life Option Act: This California state law authorizes an adult, eighteen years or older, 
who meets certain qualifications, and who has been determined by his or her attending 
physician to be suffering from a terminal disease to make a request for an “aid-in-dying drug” 
prescribed for the purpose of ending his or her life in a humane and dignified manner. 
 
Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST): A signed, designated physician 
order form that addresses a patient’s wishes about a specific set of medical issues related to 
end-of-life care. May be used for both adult and pediatric patients. 
 
Resuscitation: Interventions intended to restore cardiac activity and respirations, for example: 
 
• cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
• defibrillation 
• drug therapy 
• other life saving measures 
 
Standardized Patient-Designated Directives: Forms or medallion that recognizes and 
accommodates a patient’s wish to limit prehospital treatment at home, in long term care facilities 
or during transport between facilities. Examples include: 
 
• Statewide Emergency Medical Services Authority (EMSA)/California Medical Association 
(CMA) Prehospital DNR Form, (Ref. No. 815.1)  
• Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST, Ref. No.815.2) 
• State EMS Authority-Approved DNR Medallion   
 
Supportive Measures: Medical interventions used to provide and promote patient comfort, 
safety, and dignity. Supportive measures applicable for POLST and AHCD may include but are 
not limited to: 
 
• Airway maneuvers, including removal of foreign body 
• Suctioning 
• Oxygen administration 
• Hemorrhage control 
• Oral hydration 
• Glucose administration 
• Pain control (i.e., morphine) 
 
Valid DNR Order for Patients in a Licensed Health Care Facility:  
 
• A written document in the medical record with the patient's name and the statement “Do 
Not Resuscitate”, “No Code”, or "No CPR” that is signed and dated by a physician, or 
• A verbal order to withhold resuscitation given by the patient’s physician who is physically 
present at the scene and immediately confirms the DNR order in writing in the patient’s 
medical record, or  
• POLST with DNR checked, or 
• AHCD when the instructions state resuscitation should be withheld/discontinued 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 7 
Valid DNR Order for Patients at a Location Other Than a Licensed Facility: 
 
• EMSA/CMA Prehospital Do Not Resuscitate Form, fully executed, or 
• DNR medallion, or  
• POLST with DNR checked, or 
• AHCD when the instructions state resuscitation should be withheld/discontinued 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The right of patients to refuse unwanted medical intervention is supported by California 
statute. 
 
2. Withhold or discontinue patient resuscitation if a valid AHCD or standardized patient-
designated directive is provided. 
 
3. If the patient’s personal physician will sign the death certificate, invasive equipment (i.e., 
intravenous line, endotracheal tube) used on the patient may be removed. 
 
4. Patients are encouraged to utilize one of the standardized patient-designated directives 
to ensure that end-of-life wishes are easily recognizable. If the patient is in a private 
home, the DNR or POLST should be readily accessible or clearly posted. 
 
5. Photocopies of all the patient-designated directives are acceptable. 
 
6. After a good faith attempt to identify the patient, EMS personnel should presume  that 
the identity is correct. 
 
7. A competent person may revoke their patient-designated directive at any time. 
 
8. An adult individual, eighteen years or older, who has the capacity to make medical 
decisions and has a terminal illness may receive a prescription for an aid-in-dying drug 
and self-administer the aid-in-dying drug in order to end his or her life in a humane and 
dignified manner. 
 
9. A health care provider, including EMS personnel, shall not be subject to censure, 
discipline, suspension, loss of license, loss of privileges, loss of membership, or other 
penalty for participating in good faith compliance with the End of Life Option Act. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. General Procedures for EMS Personnel for Patients with a DNR, POLST or AHCD 
 
A. Confirm the patient is the person named in the patient-designated directive. This 
will normally require either the presence of a form of identification or a witness 
who can reliably identify the patient. 
 
B. Initiate BLS measures immediately on patients in cardiopulmonary arrest pending 
verification of a valid patient-designated directive or the criteria for discontinuing 
resuscitative measures outlined in Ref. No. 814, Determination/ Pronouncement 
of Death in the Field, Policy I, C, have been met. 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 7 
 
C. Begin resuscitation immediately and contact the base hospital for further 
direction if family members/caretakers disagree or object to withholding 
resuscitation, or if EMS personnel have any reservations regarding the validity of 
the DNR directive. 
 
D. Transport to the facility designated by the physician or family members if the 
patient‘s condition deteriorates during transport and they have a valid DNR. This 
includes 9-1-1 and non-9-1-1 transports. 
 
E. For DNR Patients who have been discharged from hospital to home or skilled 
nursing facility and expire (cessation of respirations and no palpable pulses) 
during transport: 
 
1. Do not initiate any resuscitation efforts. 
2. Notify discharging hospital. 
3. Transport back to discharging hospital. 
 
F. Documentation of a DNR incident shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
 
1. Check the “DNR” box on the EMS Report Form. 
 
2. Describe the care given. Print the base hospital physician’s name, if 
consulted, and the date of the DNR directive. 
 
3. Note the removal of any invasive equipment. 
 
4. Document DNR orders written in the medical record of a licensed facility, 
including, the date signed, physician name, and other appropriate 
information or provide a copy of the DNR with the EMS Report Form. 
 
5. Provide a copy of the AHCD and/or other patient-designated directive 
with the EMS Report Form, when possible. 
 
II. Directive-Specific Procedures  
 
A. AHCD 
 
1. A valid AHCD must be: 
 
a. Completed by a competent person age 18 or older 
b. Signed, dated, and include the patient’s name 
c. Signed by two witnesses or a notary public 
d. Signed by a patient advocate or ombudsman if the patient is in a 
skilled nursing facility 
 
2. If the situation allows, EMS personnel should make a good faith effort to 
review the AHCD and/or consult with the patient advocate. 
 
3. Base contact is required for any AHCD instructions other than withholding 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 7 
resuscitation. 
 
4. If the agent or attorney-in-fact is present, they should accompany the 
patient to the receiving facility. 
 
B. State EMS Authority-Approved DNR Medallion 
 
1. A medallion or bracelet attached to the patient is considered the most 
accurate form of identification for anyone not in a licensed facility. 
 
2. Medallions are issued only after a copy of the DNR or POLST is received 
from an applicant. There are three (3) medallion providers approved in 
California; contact information: 
 
a. Medic Alert Foundation 
  2323 Colorado Avenue 
  Turlock, CA 95382 
  Phone: 24-hour Toll Free Number (888) 633.4298 
  Toll Free FAX: (800) 863-3429 
  www.medicalert.org 
 
 
b. Caring Advocates 
   2730 Argonauta Street 
Carlsbad, CA 92009 
Phone: 1-800-647-3223  
   www.caringadvocates.org 
 
 
 c.  StickyJ Medical ID 
  10801 Endeavour Way #B  
  Seminole, FL 33777 
  Phone: 1-866-497-6265 
  www.stickyj.com  
 
3. If the medallion is engraved “DNR”, treat in accordance with Ref. No. 
815.1, Prehospital Do Not Resuscitate Form. 
 
4. If the medallion is engraved “DNR/POLST” and the POLST is available, 
treat as indicated on the POLST. 
 
5. If the medallion is engraved “DNR/POLST” and the POLST is not 
available, treat in accordance with the DNR until the valid POLST is 
produced. 
 
3. Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST) 
 
1. The POLST must be signed and dated by the physician, and the patient 
or the legally recognized decision maker. No witness to the signatures is 
necessary. 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 6 OF 7 
 
2. The POLST is designed to supplement, not replace an existing AHCD. If 
the POLST conflicts with the patient’s other health care instructions or 
advance directive, then the most recent order or instruction governs. 
 
3. In general, EMS personnel should see the written POLST unless the 
patient’s physician is present and issues a DNR order. 
 
4. There are different levels of care in Sections A and B of the POLST. 
Medical interventions should be initiated, consistent with the provider’s 
scope of practice and POLST instructions. 
 
5. For patients who have a POLST requesting only comfort-focused care, 
EMS providers shall first attempt to meet the patient’s comfort needs on 
scene by implementing supportive measures.  Patients should not be 
transported unless their comfort needs cannot be met on scene and 
transport is in accordance with their wishes. 
 
6. Contact the base hospital for direction in the event of any unusual 
circumstance. 
 
III. End of Life Option Act 
 
A patient who has obtained an aid-in-dying drug has met extensive and stringent 
requirements as required by California law. The law offers protections and exemptions 
for healthcare providers but is not explicit about EMS response for End of Life Option Act 
patients. The following guidelines are provided for EMS personnel when responding to a 
patient who has self-administered an aid-in-dying drug.  
 
A. While a final attestation is not required, the patient may have one.  If a final 
attestation is available, EMS personnel should confirm the patient is the person 
named in the final attestation and obtain a copy if possible. This will normally 
require either the presence of a form of identification or a witness who can 
reliably identify the patient. 
 
B. Provide comfort measures when applicable. 
 
C. Withhold resuscitative measures if patient is in cardiopulmonary arrest. If a 
POLST or AHCD is present, follow the directive as appropriate for the clinical 
situation. 
 
D. The patient may at any time withdraw or rescind his or her request for an aid-in-
dying drug regardless of the patient’s mental state. In this instance, EMS 
personnel shall provide medical care based on the discussion with the patient 
and as per standard protocols. EMS personnel are encouraged to consult with 
their base hospital in these situations. 
 
E. Family members may be at the scene of a patient who has self-administered an 
aid-in-dying drug. If there is objection to the End of Life Option Act, inform the 
family that comfort measures will be provided and consider Base Hospital contact 

SUBJECT: HONORING PREHOSPITAL DO NOT REFERENCE NO. 815 
 RESUSCITATE ORDERS, PHYSICIAN ORDERS 
 FOR LIFE SUSTAINING TREATMENT AND 
  END OF LIFE OPTION (AID-IN-DYING DRUG) 
 
 
PAGE 7 OF 7 
for further direction. 
 
F. Obtain a copy of the final attestation and attach it with the EMS Report Form, 
when possible. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field 
Ref. No. 815.1, EMSA/CMA Prehospital Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) Form 
Ref. No. 815.2, Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) Form 
Ref. No. 815.3, End of Life Option Field Quick Reference Guide 
 
Emergency Medical Services Authority #311: Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) and Other Patient-
Designated Directives.  EMS Personnel Guideline Limiting Prehospital Care, 6
th
  Revision, 
October 2018
