# 206341 822.17 1 14

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: GUIDE TO SUSPECTED CHILD REFERENCE NO. 822.1 
ABUSE REPORTING 
 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-14 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-23  
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-22 
 
Published with the permission of Los Angeles County Fire Department 
GUIDE TO SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE REPORTING 
 
1. NOTIFY law enforcement IMMEDIATELY if the child is suspected to be in 
imminent danger. 
 
• CALL the 24-hour Child Protection Hotline at 1 (800) 540-4000 as 
soon as possible to make the verbal report to the Department of Child 
and Family Services (DCFS). To access the priority hotline for Medical 
Providers, press * within the first 10 seconds of the call and a prompt 
will request a code be entered. Enter the code 3237 (DCFS). Once the 
code is entered, the caller will be given options to select. 
 
Press 1 for safely surrendered baby 
 
Press 4 for all other inquiries (Child Report –Medical queue) 
 
• You will be given a REFERRAL NUMBER, which is also the Case 
Number. 
 
2. COMPLETE the Suspected Child Abuse Report (SCAR) form SS8572 
within 36 hours and submit to DCFS via ONE of the following ways: 
 
• Mail:  Department of Child and Family Services (DCFS)  
1933 S. Broadway Avenue, 5th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90007 
 
• Fax:  (213) 745-1728 or (213) 745-1730 
 
• Online:    
 
1. dcfs.lacounty.gov 
2. On the left-hand side, under RESOURCES, click on “For Mandated 
Reporters Only (Complete your Mandated Report Online)” 
3. Enter the REFERRAL NUMBER and proceed 
 
Keep a copy for yourself, and a copy to mail to local law enforcement. 
 
3. MAIL (or FAX if available) a copy of the completed Suspected Child Abuse 
Report to the jurisdictional law enforcement agency.  
 
 

SUBJECT: GUIDE TO SUSPECTED CHILD REFERENCE NO. 822.1 
ABUSE REPORTING 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
Published with the permission of Los Angeles County Fire Department 
 
 
 
Notify
Law Enforcement if a Child is in Immediate Danger
Call
1 800 540-4000
As Soon as Possible to make a VERBAL Report to DCFS
Complete
The WRITTEN Report and submit to DCFS within 36 hours by: 
Mail, FAX, or Online
Mail
A Copy of the Report to the Jurisdictional 
Law Enforcement Agency
