# 224999 822.37 1 14

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT AS A 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
MANDATED REPORTER TO REPORT REFERENCE NO. 822.3 
CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-83 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 04-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-19 
 
SAMPLE 
 
EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
AS A MANDATED REPORTER 
TO REPORT CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT  
 
CHILD ABUSE REPORTING 
 
California Penal Code Section 11166.5 requires employers to provide all health practitioners, 
prior to commencing his or her employment, with the following statement.  This statement 
must be signed by the employee as a prerequisite to employment and retained by the 
employer. 
 
Section 11166 of the Penal Code requires any health practitioner who has knowledge 
of or observes a child, in his or her professional capacity or within the scope of his or 
her employment, whom he or she knows or reasonably suspects has been the victim 
of child abuse/neglect, shall report the known or suspected instance of child 
abuse/neglect to a child protective agency (CPA) immediately or as soon as 
practically possible by telephone and shall prepare and send a written report thereof 
within 36 hours of receiving the information concerning the incident.  A CPA shall be 
notified and a report shall be prepared and sent even if the child has expired, 
regardless of whether or not the possible abuse was a factor contributing to the death. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Health Practitioner: 
Any emergency medical technician I or II, paramedic, or other person certified pursuant to 
Division 2.5, Section 1797 (Emergency Medical Services System and the Prehospital 
Emergency Medical Care Personnel Act) of the Health and Safety Code. 
 
Child Protective Agency: 
Implies a police or sheriff’s department, a county probation department, or in Los Angeles 
County, the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS).  It does not include a 
school district police or security department. 
 
 
I certify that I have read and understand this statement and will comply with my obligations 
under the child abuse/neglect reporting law 
 
 
____________________________________   _____________________ 
Name         Date
