# cms1 206218

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: NOTICE OF VIOLATION - OPERATIONAL REFERENCE NO. 451.3 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-12 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 04-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 08-01-12 
Original: EMS Agency 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION – OPERATIONAL 
 
Title 7 Business Licenses – Chapter 7.16 Ambulances        O-001 
Inspection/Incident Date: Incident Location: 
 
Operator Name: CHP No.: Unit No.: 
 
VIN No.: 
Operator Address: City: Zip:  
 
Enforcement Officer: 
 
 
A NOTICE OF VIOLATION IS BEING IMPOSED ON THE OPERATOR PURSUANT TO THE FOLLOWING: 
 
 CODE SECTION OPERATIONAL VIOLATIONS CATEGORY I 
 7.16.040 
Failure to ensure that an ambulance vehicle carries an original or copy of a current California Department of Motor 
Vehicles Registration, current insurance identification card, current County business license or temporary 
authorization, most recent California Highway Patrol (CHP) inspection report and/or current CHP ambulance 
identification certificate and documentation of current information.  Company shall provide documentation of current 
information to the EMS Agency by 5:00 PM of the next County business day. 
 CODE SECTION OPERATIONAL VIOLATIONS CATEGORY II 
 
7.16.040 Using an unlicensed vehicle to pick up, or attempt to pick up, a patient in Los Angeles County. 
 
7.16.225 
Prehospital Care 
Manual Ref. Nos. 703, 
706, 710, 712, 713 
Failure to maintain proper and sufficient medical equipment and medical supplies appropriate for the level of patient 
care provided by the   licensed ambulance operator on an ambulance vehicle which is currently in operation.  Refer to 
the appropriate policy in the Prehospital Care Manual for medical equipment/supplies that are essential to patient 
care and must be on the ambulance at all times in order for the vehicle to remain in service. 
 CODE SECTION OPERATIONAL VIOLATIONS
1 
CATEGORY III 
 
7.16.140B 
7.16.160,A, 4 
Title 22 §100062 
Authorizing a person (driver or attendant) without a valid EMT certification to pick up or attempt to pick up a patient 
in Los Angeles County. 
 
7.16.140, A 
7.16.160, A, 2- 3 
Authorizing an individual (driver only) to drive an ambulance vehicle without a valid California Department of Motor 
Vehicles Ambulance Driver’s License and/or California Medical Examination card (DL-51). 
 7.16.100, A, 1 
Failure to dispatch an ambulance within a reasonable time in response to an emergency call from a public agency or 
authorized emergency transportation operator for that geographical area, unless such entity is immediately advised of 
a delay in responding to a call. 
 7.16.100, A, 2 
Fail, neglect, or refuse to disclose to any entity requesting an emergency response that an ambulance is not available, 
if indeed an ambulance  or appropriate staffing therefore is not then available. 
 
7.16.100, 3 
Title 13, §1105 (c ) 
Fail, neglect or delay to provide transportation of a patient to the most accessible and appropriate medical facility in 
accordance with state law and the applicable Los Angeles County Prehospital Care Policies or procedures. 
 
7.16.100, A, 5 
Dispatching a call as a Code 3 or emergent transport (use of red lights and siren) for response to calls received as non-
emergencies. 
 7.16.170 Failure to provide both an ambulance driver and attendant during the transport of any patient. 
 Title 13, §1101.3 
Failure to ensure that an ambulance attendant occupies the patient compartment of an ambulance during transport 
of a patient. 
 
7.16.100, 10 
Ref. No. 808 
Ref. No. 517 
Failure of an ambulance operator to refer a request for ambulance transportation to the 911 jurisdictional provider 
when the patient’s complaint/initial presentation meets any of the criteria specified in the Prehospital Care Manual, 
Reference No. 808, Section I, and such patient has not been evaluated and stabilized, to the best extent possible, by a 
physician in a health facility. 
 
Please Note:   When applicable, violations will also be referred to other appropriate regulatory agencies for follow up. 
 
Received by______________________________________________________     ___________________________________________________________ 
   (Print name and title)      (Signature and date) 
 
A follow up letter with additional instructions will be provided. The key contact for a Notice of Violation is Ambulance Licensing Programs, tel. 562-378-1500.
