# cms1 206294

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: STEMI RECEIVING CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE  
 
 REFERENCE NO. 624 
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-01-07 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 10-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-23 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: The ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction Receiving Center (SRC) Advisory –
Committee through a system-wide approach and peer review, will monitor, 
evaluate, and facilitate the quality improvement process for the STEMI and 
non-traumatic out of hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) Receiving Center 
program. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code Division 2.5 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9  
California Evidence Code, Section 1157.7 
California Civil Code, Part 2.6, Section 56. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The proceedings of the of the SRC Advisory Committee shall be free from disclosure 
and discovery (Section 1157.7, California Evidence Code) and held as a confidential 
peer review meeting with all communications deemed part of the peer review process. 
 
2. Care of the patient with a ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) and/or OHCA 
requires a system-wide approach to ensure delivery of the highest standard of care. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The SRC Advisory Committee shall: 
 
A. Review the SRC Quality Improvement Program from a system perspective. 
 
B. Develop current system-wide standards. 
 
C. Identify system issues, developing a plan for improvement, and monitoring 
results of the SRC system-wide quality improvement program. 
 
D. Meet biannually, at a minimum 
 
II. The SRC Advisory Committee membership shall consist of the following: 
 
A. SRC Medical Program Director from each SRC. 
 
B. SRC Clinical Program Director from each SRC. 
 
C. EMS Agency Medical Director and designated staff. 
 
D. Other individuals, invited as Ad Hoc members, whose presence is germane to 
the SRC system and quality assurance/improvement process. 

SUBJECT: STEMI RECEIVING CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE   
 
REFERENCE NO. 624 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
 
III. The EMS Agency shall: 
 
A. Perform periodic evaluation of the SRC program, including hospital-specific 
programs. 
 
B. Provide system-wide reports and analysis of SRC program data to the 
committee. 
 
C. Provide meeting notifications, attendance rosters, agendas, and minutes. 
 
D. Maintain all records in a confidential manner. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 320, ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction Receiving Center Standards 
Ref. No. 513,  ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 618, EMS Quality Improvement Program Committees 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program
