# cms1 206357

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
  (EMT, PARAMEDIC, HOSPITALS) 
SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
EFFECTIVE: 05-31-11  PAGE 1 OF 7 
REVISED: 01-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-22 
 
  
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish guidelines for the delivery of Emergency Medical Services (EMS) to 
protect the health and safety of the participants during mass gatherings and 
special events of various size and intensity so that participants have access to 
the appropriate level of care and to minimize the impact of these events on the 
local EMS system. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Sections 1797.202, 1797.204, 1797.220, 1798, 1798.6(a) 
  Health Insurance portability and Accountability Act 164.501 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100063, 100144, 100167(a), 
100169 
 Los Angeles County Code Title 7, Business Licenses, Chapter 7.16, 
 Ambulances 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
After Action Review/Report (AAR): A structured review or de-briefing process for analyzing 
what happened, why it happened, and how it can be done better by those responsible for an 
event. 
 
Build in/build out plan (also known as “set-up” and “strike out”): Refers to terminology 
related to special events for the “set up” of a permitted and approved floor plan on/in a stadium, 
field, building or other structure. “Strike out” is the process in set construction of dismantling, 
storing or discarding the materials used. 
 
Event Action Plan: A plan that contains objectives that reflect the event strategy and specific 
control actions for the event. The Medical Action Plan is the part of the Event Action Plan that is 
specific to medical resources and assignments. 
 
Event Footprint: The area(s) that is within the control of the event promoter, which may include 
the venue, the parking lot, and any extended area in which an event is being held. 
 
Event Medical Facility: The main medical facility in which medical care is being provided 
and/or being directed during a mass gathering or special event. This may include a first aid 
station, medical station, or any combination thereof. 
 
Harm Reduction: Policies, programs and practices that aim primarily to reduce the adverse 
health, social and economic consequences, such as alcohol and drug education pamphlets etc. 
 
Intensity of Event: The level of intensity (low, medium, or high) as designated by jurisdictional 
provider agency, is based on the number of attendees, weather considerations, geography, the 
propensity for alcohol and/or drug use, physical exertion, duration, and history of like events 
 
Jurisdictional Provider Agency: The local fire department. 
 

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 2 OF 7 
Mass Gathering: An organized assembly of 5,000 or more people. 
 
Medical Action Plan (MAP): A plan that explains the medical resources, services, and 
coordination that will be provided during an event that is provided by the promoter/venue. 
 
Medical Alert Center (MAC): Assists provider agencies and base hospitals with patient 
destination decisions and multiple casualty incidents. It serves as the control point for VMED28 
and ReddiNet systems. 
 
Participant: Any person attending or working at the event. 
 
Recurring Events: A mass gathering that occurs on a daily, weekly, monthly, seasonally, or 
annual basis at a fixed venue and with an existing developed (proven/successful) plan to 
manage the health and safety of participants and type of event. Examples include professional 
sport event, the annual county fair, etc. 
 
Special Event: A gathering that does not meet the definition of recurring event although it may 
occur at a set interval and may or may not take place in a fixed facility or venue. Examples 
could include a parade, one time concert, etc. 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
A Medical Action Plan (MAP) shall be created for every mass gathering or special event at the 
request/discretion of the jurisdictional provider agency. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The Medical Action Plan (MAP) shall include, but not be limited to, the following 
considerations: 
 
A. Event description, including event name, and expected number of participants. 
 
B. Participant safety (may include an extended footprint) including harm reduction. 
 
C. Communications Plan that secures a mechanism for direct, two-way 
communication between the jurisdictional provider agency and medical staff. 
Consider the following:   
 
• Two-way radios 
• Cellular service may be overwhelmed 
• Coordination with the MAC 
 
D. Medical resources that are appropriate to the number of participants – to include 
quantities, locations, hours of operation, and staffing levels (Advanced Life 
Support (ALS), Basic Life Support (BLS), Medical Doctor (MD), Registered Nurse 
(RN), and volunteers for the following: 
 
• Transport ambulances 
• Fixed resources –first aid stations, event medical facility  
• Mobile resources- mobile teams/carts, foot/cycle teams 
• Contingency plan if resources become overwhelmed 

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 3 OF 7 
 
E. Weather related plans 
 
F. Evacuation plan 
 
G. Build in/build out plan 
 
II. Responsibility of the Promoter/Event Venue 
 
A. Notify the jurisdictional provider agency of the event, participate in the permitting 
process, develop and review the event MAP with the event medical staff and the 
jurisdictional provider agency. 
 
B. Submit the MAP for approval to the jurisdictional provider agency at a minimum 
of twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to the event. 
 
C. Submit any final changes to the MAP to the jurisdictional provider agency at a 
minimum of seventy-two (72) hours prior to the event. The jurisdictional provider 
agency will respond within twenty-four (24) hours. 
 
D. Utilize Los Angeles County licensed ambulance companies that have, at 
minimum, approval as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Automated 
External Defibrillator (AED) service provider in the State of California and Los 
Angeles County. 
 
E. Incorporate and utilize harm reduction programs for events when applicable. 
 
F. Participate in an AAR upon the request of the jurisdictional provider agency or 
the Los Angeles County EMS Agency. AARs shall be held within fourteen (14) 
days post-event unless otherwise approved by the jurisdictional provider agency. 
 
III. Responsibility of the Jurisdictional Provider Agency 
 
A. Review and respond to EAP and the MAP within fourteen (14) calendar days 
prior to the event. Respond to any final changes to the MAP within twenty-four 
(24) hours. 
 
B. Verify EMS personnel utilized in the event are appropriately licensed, accredited, 
and/or certified in Los Angeles County. 
 
 To verify an EMT/Paramedic: 
https://emsverification.emsa.ca.gov/Verification/ 
 
 To verify a registered nurse/licensed vocational nurse/physician: 
 https://www.breeze.ca.gov/  
 
 To verify a physician is Board Certified or Board Eligible in Emergency Medicine: 
https://www.certificationmatters.org/find-my-doctor/.org 
 
 

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 4 OF 7 
C. When necessary to protect health and safety, may require additional or more 
stringent requirements than listed in this policy (i.e., medical staffing 
requirements). 
 
D. Educate the event promoter/venue regarding licensed ambulance company 
capabilities and hospital resources. 
 
E. Notify the Los Angeles County EMS Agency MAC at 866-940-4401 or via email 
at lemsadutyofficer@dhs.lacounty.gov of the event as soon as possible, if there 
is an anticipated impact to the EMS system. 
 
F. Assist with the coordination of the AAR for any event that meets the definition of 
Multiple Casualty Incident (MCI) as outlined in Ref. No. 519, Management of 
Multiple Casualty Incidents. 
 
IV. Responsibility of the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency 
 
A. The EMS Agency Medical Director, upon request will: 
 
1. Coordinate a review of the MAP and provide recommendations to the 
event medical provider and the jurisdictional provider agency 
 
2. Respond within three (3) business days 
 
A sample MAP is included in Ref. No. 842.2, Mass Gathering and Special 
Events Medical Action Plan 
 
B. Medical Alert Center (MAC), upon request will: 
 
1. Notify the hospitals surrounding the event at least seven (7) calendar 
days prior to the event 
 
2. Assign personnel to staff the event command center upon request of the 
jurisdictional provider agency 
 
3. Poll area hospitals for emergency department capacity as needed 
 
4. Monitor the number of patient transports during the event. 
 
5. Open an MCI on the ReddiNet when the number of patients and types of 
illnesses/injuries are expected to exceed the capabilities of the nearest 
hospitals. 
 
a. Provide patient destination 
 
b. Notify the Medical Officer on Duty (MOD) and the Administrator on 
Duty (AOD) 
 
c. Provide a summary of incident with final disposition of all patients 
to the jurisdictional provider agency and EMS Agency 
Administration within 72 hours post event.  

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 5 OF 7 
 
6. In accordance with Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty 
Incidents, assist with an AAR as needed or requested. 
 
V. Responsibility of the Event Medical Provider 
 
A. Provide adequate equipment and supplies to manage care based on the level of 
service (BLS, ALS) and number of participants. 
 
B. Identify the event medical facility and ambulance staging locations. 
 
C. Submit a list of event medical personnel to the jurisdictional provider agency at 
least ten (10) calendar days prior to the event to include: 
 
• Name of person 
• Type of license or certification (EMT, Paramedic, Nurse, or Physician), 
number and expiration date 
• Include all volunteers or non-licensed personnel or students that will be 
attending the event, if applicable. 
 
A sample roster is included in Ref. No. 842.3, Mass Gathering and Special  
Events Event Roster. 
 
D. Submit any changes to previously approved event personnel to the jurisdictional 
provider agency at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the event. The 
jurisdictional provider agency will respond within twenty-four (24) hours. 
 
E. Maintain a patient care log, to be submitted to the EMS Agency and the 
jurisdictional provider agency within seventy-two (72) hours after the conclusion 
of the event, which shall include at a minimum: 
 
• Patient information or patient identifier  
• Age 
• Chief complaint  
• Treatment 
• Disposition  
• Diagnosis, if a physician is on site  
• Destination, if transported 
 
A sample patient care log is included in Ref. No. 842.4, Mass Gathering and 
Special Event Patient Care Log 
 
F. A patient care record (PCR) shall be generated for each patient that receives an 
assessment and/or treatment at a mass gathering or special event. All patient 
care should be documented in accordance to Ref. No. 606, Documentation of 
Prehospital Care. 
 
G. Provide patient care records (PCRs) for review by the EMS Agency or 
jurisdictional provider agency when requested. 
 

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 6 OF 7 
H. Participate in the After Action Review/Report (AAR) as requested. 
 
VI. Responsibility of the Prehospital Providers 
 
A. Nurses shall be licensed by the State of California and preferably have 
experience in emergency medical care and triage of seriously ill or injured 
patients. 
 
B. Paramedics shall be licensed by the State of California, accredited in Los 
Angeles County and on duty for an approved LA County ALS provider. 
 
C. EMTs shall be certified by the State of California and adhere to the Los Angeles 
County Scope of Practice. 
 
D. Assess participants and escort them to the event medical facility, as appropriate, 
and per the event’s MAP. Following assessment, the participant shall be referred 
to the event physician on scene, if applicable. If medical staffing levels do not 
include a physician, EMS providers will follow Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocol, 
et al. 
 
E. Participants must be medically appropriate to be transported to the event medical 
facility that is staffed with a physician. Medically appropriate patients may include 
altered level of consciousness (ALOC) without evidence of head trauma or 
history of recent seizure or active seizure. Any patient meeting Ref. No. 506, 
Trauma Triage criteria shall be transported directly to a trauma center 
coordinated through MAC without delay, or if MAC not present, contact the 
designated base hospital. 
 
F. Once the event has been declared an MCI, the paramedics shall take direction 
from the MAC for patient destination and treatment per Ref No. 1200, Treatment 
Protocol, et al. 
 
VII. Responsibility of the Primary Contracted Physician at the Event, if applicable 
 
A. Be Board Certified in Emergency Medicine and familiar with the Los Angeles 
County Paramedic and EMT scopes of practice. Additional physicians must be 
Board Certified or Board Eligible in Emergency Medicine. 
 
B. Be familiar with the Los Angeles County prehospital care policies. 
 
C. Maintain communication with the jurisdictional incident commander, event 
coordinator and other medical staff. 
 
D. Take responsibility for medical oversight of all licensed or certified health care 
professionals providing patient care at the event. 
 
E. Take responsibility for the care and disposition for all patients at the designated 
event medical facility. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 

SUBJECT: MASS GATHERING AND SPECIAL REFERENCE NO. 842 
 EVENTS INTERFACE WITH 
 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
PAGE 7 OF 7 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 412, EMT Automated External Defibrillator (AED) Service Provider Program 
Requirements 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 802, EMT Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 816, Physician at the Scene 
Ref. No. 842.1, Resource Guidelines for Mass Gatherings and Special Events 
Ref. No. 842.2, Mass Gathering and Special Events Medical Action Plan (MAP) 
Ref. No. 842.3, Mass Gathering and Special Events Event Roster 
Ref. No. 842.4, Mass Gathering and Special Events Patient Care Log
