# cms1 206209

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-01-88 PAGE 1 OF 9 
REVISED:  04-01-2022 
SUPERSEDES:  07-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define the criteria to be approved as a Registered Nurse/Respiratory 
Specialty Care Transport (SCT) Provider in Los Angeles County. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.52, 1797.178, 
1798.170 
Business and Professions Code, Section 3700 
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act of 2006 
Los Angeles County Code, Title 7. Chapter 7.16. Ambulances 
Los Angeles County Code, Title 7 Chapter 7.08. Denial or Revocation 
Conditions 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Advanced Life Support (ALS) Transport: A ground or air ambulance transport of a patient 
who requires or may require skills or treatment modalities that do not exceed the paramedic 
scope of practice. An ALS transport may be required for either a non-emergency or emergency 
transport. 
 
Basic Life Support (BLS) Transport: A ground or air ambulance transport of a patient who 
requires skills or treatment modalities that do not exceed the Los Angeles County EMT scope of 
practice. A BLS transport may be sufficient to meet the needs of the patient requiring either non-
emergency or emergency transport. 
 
Registered Nurse-Staffed SCT (RN-SCT): A ground or air ambulance interfacility transport of 
a patient who may require skills or treatment modalities that exceed the paramedic scope of 
practice, but do not exceed the RN scope of practice. A nurse-staffed SCT may be required for 
either a non-emergency or emergency interfacility transport. 
 
Respiratory Care Practitioner Staffed SCT (RCP-SCT): A ground or air ambulance 
interfacility transport of a patient who requires the skills or treatment modalities that exceed the 
Los Angeles County EMT scope of practice but does not exceed the RCP scope of practice. A 
RCP-staffed SCT may be required for either a non-emergency or emergency interfacility 
transport. 
 
Specialty Care Transport (SCT): An interfacility transport of a critically injured or ill patient by a 
ground vehicle, including the provision of the medically necessary supplies and services, at a 
level of service beyond the scope of practice of the paramedic. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. A private ambulance provider must be licensed by the County of Los Angeles as a basic 
life support (BLS) provider in order to be eligible for approval as a SCT provider. 
 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 9 
2. A BLS private ambulance provider must be approved by the EMS Agency to employ 
registered nurses (RNs) and/or respiratory care practitioners (RCPs) to staff and provide 
interfacility SCTs. 
 
3. Staffing a SCT vehicle/unit consists of a minimum of one RN and/or RCP and two EMTs. 
Physicians, RNs, RCPs, perfusionists, or other personnel may be added to the SCT 
team as needed. 
 
4. RCPs may be utilized to perform duties commensurate with their scope of practice; 
however, additional transport personnel (EMTs, RNs, physicians, or paramedics) must 
accompany the RCP based on the level of acuity and anticipated patient care 
requirements. 
 
5. This policy does not apply when RNs and/or RCPs employed by a healthcare facility are 
utilized by an ALS or BLS provider agency to provide interfacility patient transport (i.e., 
emergent situations, specialized transport teams, etc.). 
 
6. Any violation of this policy or ordinance could result in a program request denial or the 
cancellation of a provider’s SCT program. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Eligibility Requirements 
 
A BLS ambulance provider licensed by Los Angeles County may be approved to utilize 
RNs and/or RCPs to provide interfacility transports if the eligibility requirements outlined 
in this policy are met. 
 
A. Transport Medical Director 
 
1. Provider shall have a medical director who is currently licensed as a 
physician in the State of California, qualified by training and/or 
experience, current practice in acute critical care medicine and board 
certified or eligible by the American Board of Emergency Medicine or in 
their corresponding specialty. 
 
2. The Medical Director or designee of the EMS Agency must approve all 
Transport Medical Director Candidates. 
 
3. The Transport Medical Director shall: 
 
a. Sign and approve, in advance, all medical protocols and SCT 
policies and procedures. 
 
b. Oversee the ongoing training of all SCT medical personnel. 
 
c. Be familiar with the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active 
Labor Act (EMTALA) and the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) requirements. 
 
d. Attend the EMS Orientation Program within six months of 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 9 
employment as a Transport Medical Director. 
 
e. Participate in the development, implementation, and ongoing 
evaluation of a quality improvement (QI) program. 
 
f. Sign and submit Ref. No. 701.1, Provider Agency Drug 
Authorizing Physician Confirmation of Agreement to Purchase 
Drugs and Medical Supplies for the SCT provider. 
 
g. Sign and submit Ref. No. 702.4, Provider Agency Medical Director 
Notification of Controlled Substance Program Implementation for 
the SCT provider (if applicable). 
 
B. Transport Coordinator 
 
1. RN Coordinator: Providers utilizing RNs to staff SCTs shall have a 
Coordinator who is currently licensed in the State of California as a RN, 
meets all minimum requirements of a transport RN, has a minimum of 
one year experience in ambulance transports, and current practice in 
emergency medicine, critical care nursing or specialty care transports 
(minimum of    96 working hours annually). 
 
2. RCP Coordinator: Providers utilizing RCPs to staff SCTs shall have a 
RCP Coordinator who is currently licensed in the State of California as a 
RCP, meets all minimum requirements of a transport RCP, has a 
minimum of one year experience in ambulance transports, and current 
practice in acute respiratory care or specialty care transports (minimum of 
96 working hours annually). 
 
The RN Coordinator may function as the RCP Coordinator; however, the 
RCP Coordinator may NOT function as the RN Coordinator. 
 
3. The Transport Coordinator shall: 
 
a. Sign and approve, in advance, all policies and procedures to be 
followed for SCTs. 
 
b. Maintain documentation indicating that all SCT personnel have 
been oriented to the RN/RCP-staffed SCT program. 
 
c. Maintain documentation of all applicable licensure, certification 
and/or accreditation requirements for all SCT personnel. 
 
d. Be familiar with EMTALA and HIPAA. 
 
e. Ensure the development, implementation and ongoing evaluation 
of a QI program in collaboration with the Transport Medical 
Director. 
 
f. Attend the EMS Agency Orientation Program within six months of 
employment as Transport Coordinator. 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 9 
 
g. Perform annual skills competency evaluation of all medical 
personnel. 
 
h. Submit a written and signed affirmation of adherence to all federal, 
state, and local rules, regulations and laws, including Los Angeles 
County prehospital care policies and procedures as outlined in 
Title 7, Chapter 7.16, Ambulances. 
 
C. Transport Personnel 
 
1. Two EMTs comprise the BLS interfacility transport team; additional 
personnel (physicians, RNs, and/or RCPs) shall be added to the BLS 
team based on the acuity and anticipated needs of the patient during 
transport. 
 
Staffing exceptions must be approved by the EMS Agency prior to 
utilization by the ambulance provider. 
 
2. RNs, RCPs and EMTs shall: 
 
a. Be currently licensed or certified for unrestricted practice in 
California. 
 
b. Be currently certified by AHA or equivalent in    healthcare provider 
level cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
 
c. Successfully complete a RN/RCP Staffed Interfacility SCT 
Program Orientation sponsored by the provider agency and 
approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
d. Successfully complete an annual skills   competency evaluation 
conducted by the provider agency and approved by the EMS 
Agency. 
 
e. Be familiar with EMTALA and HIPAA. 
 
f. Submit a written and signed affirmation of adherence to all federal, 
state, and local rules, regulations and laws, including Los Angeles 
County prehospital care policies and procedures as outlined in 
Title 7, Chapter 7.16, Ambulances. 
 
3. In addition to the requirements listed in Section I. C. 2.   all transport RNs 
shall: 
 
a. Have a minimum of two years nursing experience in a critical care 
area relevant to the type of SCT transports the RN will provide 
(pediatric vs. adults), within the previous 24 months prior to 
employment as a transport nurse. 
 
b. Be currently certified in Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 9 
and, if participating in pediatric transports, currently certified in 
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS). 
 
c. For full-time transport nurses, complete a total of 30 continuing 
education (CE) contact hours approved by the California Board of 
Registered Nursing (BRN) annually, that are relevant to their 
clinical setting and types of transports performed. 
 
d. For part-time (working less than 32 hours per week as a transport 
RN), complete 96 hours of documented critical care experience 
per year or complete a total of 30 CE contact hours approved by 
the California BRN annually, that are relevant to their clinical 
setting and type of transports performed. 
 
e. Recommendation: Certified Emergency Nurse (CEN), Critical 
Care Registered Nurse (CCRN), Mobile Intensive Care Nurse 
(MICN), or Certified Flight Nurse (CFRN). 
 
4. In addition to the requirements listed in Section I. C. 2., all transport RCPs 
shall: 
 
a. Have a minimum of two years respiratory care experience in an 
acute care or respiratory care hospital, relevant to the type of SCT 
transports the RCP will provide (pediatric vs. adults), within 18 
months prior to employment as a transport RCP or have 
successfully passed the Adult Critical Care Specialty (ACCS) 
Examination and are in good standing with the National Board for 
Respiratory Care (NBRC). 
 
b. Be current in ACLS and, if participating in pediatric transports, be 
current in PALS. 
 
c. For full-time transport RCPs, complete 30 CE contact hours 
approved by the Respiratory Care Board of California annually, 
that are relevant to their clinical setting and type of transports 
performed. 
 
d. For part time transport RCPs (working less than 32 hours per 
week as a transport RCP), complete 96 hours of documented 
critical care experience per year or complete a total of 30 CE 
contact hours approved by the Respiratory Care Board of 
California annually, that are relevant to their clinical setting and 
type of transports performed. 
 
D. Subcontracting SCT Services 
 
1. If the licensed BLS provider intends to subcontract SCT services, the 
EMS Agency must be notified in advance for approval. 
 
2. The subcontracting company must submit program information through 
the licensed BLS provider to the EMS Agency for approval prior to 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 6 OF 9 
providing SCT services. 
 
3. Subcontractors must meet the same standards/requirements as the 
ambulance provider, including insurance. 
 
E. Insurance Requirements 
 
1. It is the ambulance provider agency’s responsibility to ensure insurance 
requirements are maintained as required by the Los Angeles County 
Code of Ordinance. 
 
2. Minimum insurance levels must be maintained as outlined in Title 7, 
Chapter 7.16, Ambulances, with the exception of Professional Liability. 
Professional Liability limits must be maintained at $2,000,000 per claim 
and $3,000,000 per aggregate. 
 
F. Policies and Procedures 
 
Provider shall have a policy and procedure manual that includes, at a minimum, 
the following: 
 
1. A description of the interfacility transport orientation program and process 
utilized to verify skill competency for registered nurses, EMTs, RCPs and, 
if applicable, other medical personnel. 
 
2. Identify the Transport Medical Director, and RN and/or RCP Transport 
Coordinator. The EMS Agency shall be notified in writing of any changes 
in these key personnel utilizing Ref. No. 621.1, Notification of Personnel 
Changes. 
 
3. Procedures for contacting the Transport Medical Director and SCT 
Coordinator if needed during a patient transport. 
 
4. Interfacility transfer paperwork that complies with Title 22, Section 70749. 
 
5. Record retention procedures which meets the requirements listed in Ref. 
No. 608, Retention and Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records. 
 
6. The sending physician’s Statement of Responsibility for the patient during 
transfer in accordance with EMTALA. 
 
7. Procedures to be followed for changes in destination due to unforeseen 
changes in the patient’s condition or other unexpected circumstances. 
 
8. Current patient care protocols which have been approved by the 
Transport Medical Director. 
 
9. A controlled drug policy which meets the requirements of Ref. No. 701, 
Supply and Resupply of Designated EMS Units/Vehicles and if 
applicable, Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units. 
 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 7 OF 9 
G. Quality Improvement (QI) Program 
 
1. The Provider Agency shall have a QI Program that meets the standards 
outlined in    Ref. No. 618, EMS Quality Improvement Program Committees, 
and Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program. 
 
2. Records of QI activities shall be maintained by the provider and available 
for review by the EMS Agency. 
 
H. Required Equipment 
 
1. Each transport vehicle shall include as minimum standard inventory all 
items required by Ref. No. 710, Basic Life Support Ambulance 
Equipment. 
 
2. RN staffed SCT vehicles shall also be equipped with the standardized 
inventory specified in Ref. No. 712, Nurse Staffed Critical Care Inventory. 
 
3. RCP staffed SCT vehicles shall also be equipped with the standardized 
inventory specified in Ref. No. 713, Respiratory Care Practitioner Staffed 
Critical Care Inventory. 
 
4. In addition, each transport vehicle shall have equipment and supplies 
commensurate with the scope of practice of any additional transport 
medical personnel (e.g. balloon pump technicians, neonatal intensive 
care unit transport teams, etc.) staffing the SCT unit. This requirement 
may be fulfilled through the utilization of appropriate kits (cases/packs), 
which must be removed if the vehicle is being utilized for BLS transport 
purposes. 
 
5. Biomedical equipment used for patient care must show evidence of 
ongoing maintenance and safety certification (e.g., service agreements, 
calibration logs, etc.). 
 
6. If a dedicated ambulance (unit) is not being utilized strictly for SCT 
transports, and the provider is utilizing “jump bags” or its equivalent to 
store medical equipment and medication for the unit, the “jump bag” or its 
equivalent must be numbered/assigned a unique identifier.  Additionally, 
that numbering must be marked on the individual bag(s). 
 
7. Provider agencies may request to place additional SCT units (or jump 
bags) into service and shall notify the EMS Agency for inventory 
inspection and approval. Requests and inventory inspections shall be 
done prior to deployment. 
 
II. Application Process and Program Review 
 
Request for approval of a SCT program must be made in writing to the Director of the 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency and shall include the following: 
 
A. Specify the type of SCT services the provider will supply (RN-SCT, RCP-SCT or 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 8 OF 9 
both). 
 
B. Proposed identification and location of the SCT units. 
 
C. Procedures and protocols as outlined in Section I. F. 
 
D. Documentation of qualifications of the proposed Transport Medical Director 
(resumé/curriculum vitae, copy of medical license and applicable board 
certification). 
 
E. Documentation of qualifications of the proposed SCT Coordinator(s) (resumé(s) 
or curriculum vitae, copy of current license(s) and certifications). 
 
F. Copy of the current QI Plan (include specific indicators which will be utilized to 
monitor the SCT program) as outlined in Section I.   G. 
 
G. Statement acknowledging agreement to comply with all policies and procedures 
of the EMS Agency, including immediate notification in writing of a change in 
Transport Medical Director, or SCT Coordinator (Ref. No. 621.1). 
 
H. The documents needed for approval of a SCT program are due to the EMS 
Agency as a complete packet within 30 (thirty) days of receipt of letter from the 
EMS Agency acknowledging the request for approval. If a complete packet 
(application) is not received within a 30 (thirty) day period, the request will be 
denied. A subsequent request for approval will not be accepted for 90 (ninety) 
days. This will result in the providers’ inability to provide SCT services until 
approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
III.   Program Review 
 
A. The EMS Agency shall perform periodic on-site audits of transport records, QI 
processes, equipment/vehicle inspections, and personnel qualifications to ensure 
compliance with this policy. 
 
B. Non-compliance with this policy may lead to the EMS Agency suspending or 
revoking approval of the SCT program. 
 
C. SCT programs that do not operate for a period of 6 consecutive months or 
greater, may result in program suspension or termination. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 414.4 1 Verification of Employment Letter 
Ref. No. 421    Private Ambulance Operator Medical Director 
Ref. No. 517,   Provider Agency Transport/Response Guidelines 
Ref. No. 608,   Retention and Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records 
Ref. No. 618,   EMS Quality Improvement Program Committees 
Ref. No. 620,   EMS Quality Improvement Program 
Ref. No. 701,   Supply and Resupply of Designated EMS Units/Vehicles 
Ref. No. 702,   Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 

SUBJECT: SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT PROVIDER REFERENCE NO. 414 
 
 
PAGE 9 OF 9 
Ref. No. 710,   Basic Life Support Ambulance Equipment 
Ref. No. 712,   Nurse Staffed Critical Care Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 713,   Respiratory Care Practitioner (RCP) Critical Care Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 802,   Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803,   Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
 
Business and Professions Code: 
California Nursing Practice Act, Section 2725 
California Respiratory Care Practice Act, Sections 3700 et al-3700 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services  
Title 22, California Code of Regulations Division 5, Section 70749
