# cms1 206356

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: MEDICAL SUPPORT DURING EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN, PHYSICIAN 
 TACTICAL OPERATIONS REFERENCE NO. 840 
 
EFFECTIVE: 03-30-11  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 10-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ______________________   _________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To provide direction for tactical emergency medical services (TEMS) personnel 
assigned to a tactical team by an agency that is conducting a preplanned law 
enforcement incident. 
 
 To provide guidance for emergency transportation of police and EMS responder 
canine’s injured in the line of duty. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code 1797.10, 1797.220, 1797.221, 1798 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 3 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST): The California Commission on Peace Officer 
Standards and Training develops training standards and evaluates/approves curriculum for 
basic police officer training programs in California. 
 
Tactical Medicine Training Program: A POST-certified and EMSA-approved, specific 
operational training program for tactical medicine providers and operators that trains EMS 
personnel to safely deliver medical care during a law enforcement response. 
 
Tactical Emergency Medical Services (TEMS) Personnel: Physicians, Emergency Medical 
Technicians (EMTs), paramedics or Mobile Intensive Care Nurses (MICNs) that have 
successfully completed a tactical medicine training program, that provide medical care during a 
tactical response utilizing their authorized scope of practice. 
 
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD): Weapons or devices intended to cause death or 
serious bodily injury to a significant number of people through the release of toxic chemicals. A 
disease organism, or radiation. 
 
Hot Zone: The area in which there is a direct and immediate threat. 
 
Warm Zone: The area deemed by law enforcement to no longer have direct or immediate 
threats which can be utilized to perform tactical field care and triage to victims. 
 
Cold Zone: The area where no significant danger or threat is reasonably anticipated for the 
provider or patient. 
 
Police/EMS Responder Canine (K-9): A dog that is part of a team of law enforcement officers 
or EMS providers, with specific training in and duties that may include, but not limited to, search 
and rescue, passive alert dog, and service dog. 
 
  

SUBJECT: MEDICAL SUPPORT DURING EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN, PHYSICIAN 
 TACTICAL OPERATIONS REFERENCE NO. 840 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Training is a critical role in the ability of TEMS personnel to effectively support law 
enforcement and contribute to the safe and successful resolution of critical incident 
responses. 
 
2. These guidelines are not intended to replace existing EMS policies or circumvent the 
established response of EMS in the local county. 
 
3. While medical support is important at any tactical operation, agencies should carefully 
consider the risk versus benefit of adding armed personnel with limited firearms and 
tactical experience. 
 
4. A primary objective of TEMS is to provide the medical treatment of victims outside of the 
hot zone. Ideally, patient care should be provided in the cold zone. 
 
5. The TEMS provider agency should participate in the pre-planning of incident 
management. 
 
6. EMS personnel who operate in the cold zone should receive an orientation to TEMS 
operations. 
 
7. K-9 units are an integral part of the team, working collaboratively with EMS responders 
and police officers as first responders to incidents and crime scenes. K-9s injured in the 
line of duty may require immediate transport to a facility capable of caring for their 
injuries. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Certification 
 
A. Paramedics and MICNs that are a member of a TEMS team shall be employed 
on duty and sponsored by an approved Advanced Life Support (ALS) provider. 
 
1. Paramedics shall be licensed by the State and accredited in Los Angeles 
County. 
 
2. MICNs shall have a current California license as a Registered Nurse and 
a current Los Angeles County MICN certification. 
 
B. EMTs shall be certified by the State and have successfully completed the Los 
Angeles County local scope of practice. 
 
II. Training 
 
A. TEMS personnel who operate within a hot zone shall be trained, at minimum, 
through a POST-certified and EMSA-approved or equivalent tactical medicine 
training program. The training hour requirements as outlined in POST/EMSA 
Recommendations are: 
 
1. Non-law enforcement TEMS personnel 
 

SUBJECT: MEDICAL SUPPORT DURING EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN, PHYSICIAN 
 TACTICAL OPERATIONS REFERENCE NO. 840 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
a. An 80-hour minimum course which includes didactic and skills 
training, tactical weapons operations, medical scenarios and 
includes final written, skills and tactical medical scenario 
examinations. 
 
2. Law Enforcement TEMS personnel 
 
a. Must be pre-qualified by successful completion of a POST- 
approved Basic Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) course and 
an approved WMD training including medical care for WMD. 
 
b. A 40-hour minimum course which includes didactic and skills 
training, medical scenarios and includes final written, skills and 
tactical medical scenario examinations. 
III. Deployment 
 
A. TEMS personnel should be familiar with the location of the nearest medical 
centers, paramedic base hospitals and specialty centers such as trauma, 
pediatric trauma centers, etc. 
 
B. When responding to jurisdictions outside of Los Angeles County, TEMS 
personnel shall operate within their accredited scope of practice. 
 
IV. Emergency Treatment and Transportation of an Injured Police/EMS Responder K-9 
 
A. A licensed Los Angeles County Ambulance Operator is authorized to transport a 
police/EMS responder K-9 injured in the line of duty, to a veterinary medical 
facility capable of treating the K-9 if the unit is unencumbered and no person is 
requiring medical services of the ambulance at the time the decision is made to 
transport the K-9. 
 
B. It is the responsibility of the handler to maintain control of the K-9 while providing 
medical treatment en-route. If comfortable, the ambulance crew may assist in the 
moving and transportation of the K-9 while allowing the necessary space in the 
back of the ambulance for the handler to render care. 
 
C. An injured K-9 may be aggressive towards its handler, therefore, the ambulance 
crew should only assist with the K-9’s care when it is determined to be safe and 
at the direction of the handler. 
 
D. The handler is responsible to have all necessary equipment and supplies to care 
for the injured K-9. The ambulance crew may provide additional supplies 
(dressings, etc.) if requested. 
 
E. It is the handler’s responsibility to be familiar with, and provide directions to, the 
most appropriate receiving veterinary facility. The ambulance crew, or their 
dispatch, at the request of the handler, may contact the veterinary facility (contact 
information will be provide by the handler) while en-route, in order to provide an 
estimated time of arrival to the facility. 
 
  

SUBJECT: MEDICAL SUPPORT DURING EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN, PHYSICIAN 
 TACTICAL OPERATIONS REFERENCE NO. 840 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Policy Manual: 
Ref. No. 422, Authorization for Paramedic Provider Status of a Los Angeles County Based 
Law   Enforcement Agency 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 802.1, EMT Scope of Practice, Table Forma) 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803.1, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice, Table Format 
Ref. No. 1006, Paramedic Accreditation 
Ref. No. 1010, Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) Certification/Recertification 
 
California Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) in collaboration with the Emergency 
Medical Services Authority, Tactical Medicine, Operational Programs and Standardized Training 
Recommendations, July 2009.
