# cms1 206275

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(HEALTHCARE PROVIDER) 
SUBJECT: CONFIDENTIALITY OF PATIENT INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 602 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 03-24-75       PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To describe the policy on disclosure of patient identity and/or health information. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
 California Code of Regulations Title 22, Chapter 7 
 California Civil Code 56-56.16 and 1798-1798.78 
 California Health and Safety Code, 1280.15, 120990f, 123100-123149.5 
 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH 
Act) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Health Information: Any information possessed by a healthcare provider regarding a patient’s 
medical history, mental or physical condition, or treatment, or the specific circumstances 
surrounding a specific patient identifiable incident (e.g. suspected child/elder abuse). 
 
Protected Health Information (PHI): Individually identifiable health information that is held or 
transmitted in any form or media, whether electronic, written, spoken, printed, digital, recorded, 
or photographic, which can be linked to an individual, or there is a reasonable basis to believe it 
can be used to identify an individual. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Persons receiving healthcare services have a right to expect that confidentiality of PHI is 
reasonably preserved. Therefore: 
 
A. No healthcare provider shall disclose medical information regarding a patient 
without first obtaining an authorization from the patient or the patient’s legally 
authorized representative, except when such disclosure is permitted or required 
by law. 
 
B. Paramedic communication shall be limited to information that is relevant to the 
field care of the patient. If the patient’s name is necessary, base hospitals shall 
request the paramedics to provide the information via landline. 
 
II. All prehospital provider agencies and receiving hospitals shall have policies in place 
regarding the disclosure and documentation of PHI release. 
 
III. PHI may be disclosed by prehospital personnel to the following in accordance with the 
agency or hospital-specific policy related to the release of health information: 
 
A. Healthcare providers involved in the care of the patient 
 
B. EMS Agency 
 
C. Base hospital or provider agency for quality improvement purposes 
 

SUBJECT: CONFIDENTIALITY OF PATIENT INFORMATION REFERENCE NO. 602 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
D. Patient, legal guardian, or others authorized by the patient 
 
E. Law enforcement officers when the health care provider believes, in good faith, 
that the information requested is related to the investigation of a crime 
 
F. Provider agency’s billing department, as needed for billing purposes 
 
G. In response to a properly noticed subpoena, court order, or other legally 
authorized disclosure 
 
IV. Any prehospital records used for training or continuing education purposes must be 
edited to remove identifying patient/incident information. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents (MCI) 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 607, Electronic Submission of Prehospital Patient Data 
Ref. No. 608, Retention & Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records 
Ref. No. 612, Release of EMS Records 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field  
Ref. No. 822, Suspected Child Abuse/Neglect Reporting Guidelines 
Ref. No. 823, Elder Abuse and Dependent Adult Abuse Reporting Guidelines 
Ref. No. 832, Treatment/Transport of Minors
