# cms1 206053

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
 CERTIFICATION 
 
EFFECTIVE: 12-01-87  PAGE 1 OF 9 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ______________________  _________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define the requirements for Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) initial 
certification, renewal certification, or reinstatement of certification, and 
disciplinary action.  
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 22. Division 9. Chapters 2, 6, 10, 11 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Certification Action: Actions that may be taken by a Local Emergency Medical Services 
Agency (LEMSA) medical director that include denial, suspension, revocation of an EMT 
certificate, or placing an EMT certificate holder on probation. 
 
Commission on Accreditation for Pre-hospital Continuing Education (CAPCE): An 
accrediting body charged with the review and accreditation of EMS continuing education (CE). 
 
Disciplinary Cause: An act that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, and 
duties of an EMT and is evidence of a threat to public health and safety, per Health and Safety 
Code Section 1798.200. 
 
Discipline: Either a disciplinary plan taken by a relevant employer or certification action taken 
by a LEMSA Medical Director. 
 
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT): An individual who has successfully completed an 
approved EMT course which meets California training requirements, has passed all required 
examinations, and is certified by a California EMT certifying entity. 
 
EMT Certifying Entity: A public safety agency with an approved EMT training program for the 
purpose of certifying their personnel or the medical director of the LEMSA. 
 
EMT Certifying Psychomotor Examination: The National Registry of Emergency Medical 
Technicians (NREMT) EMT psychomotor examination. Examination results shall be valid for 
application and certification purposes for two (2) years from the date of the examination. 
 
EMT Certifying Cognitive Examination: The National Registry of Emergency Medical 
Technicians (NREMT) EMT cognitive examination. Examination results shall be valid for 
application and certification purposes for two (2) years from the date of the examination. 
 
EMT Skills Competency Verification (EMT SCV): The direct observation of the required EMT 
skills by an approved skills verifier. Verification indicates the skill was competently performed by 
the EMT. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 2 OF 9 
Local Emergency Medical Services Agency (LEMSA): The agency, department, or office 
having primary responsibility for administration of the EMS system in a county. 
 
Model Disciplinary Orders: Recommended guidelines which were develop by the State EMS 
Authority to provide consistent and equitable certification action in cases dealing with 
disciplinary cause. 
 
National Registry of Emergency Medical Technician (NREMT): The nations EMS 
certification agency. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. An application for EMT certification or renewal shall be denied when an applicant does 
not meet the requirements for certification or renewal as outlined in the policy. 
Additionally, the LEMSA medical director may deny, place on probation, suspend or 
revoke a certification for the commission of a crime or act that is considered substantially 
related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the certificate holder and is evidence 
of a threat to the public health and safety. 
 
2. All certified EMTs and applicants shall obtain a criminal history background report with 
results that do not prohibit them from certification pursuant to Title 22, California Code of 
Regulations, Section 100214.3, and California Health and Safety Code, Section 
1798.200. 
 
3. Incomplete applications will delay processing. The applicant will be notified, in writing, of 
deficiencies and completion deadline. Failure to provide missing elements by 
established due date will result in closure of application and forfeiture of the application 
fee. 
 
4. Renewal application with required documentation shall be submitted no later than thirty 
(30) days prior to certification expiration. 
 
5. EMTs certified by the EMS Agency shall notify the Agency, in writing, of changes to legal 
name, address, phone, email, or employer within thirty (30) days of the event. 
 
6. EMTs shall adhere to the current EMS Agency prehospital care policies, procedures, 
and protocols while functioning in Los Angeles County. 
 
7. A California licensed paramedic may function and perform any activity in the EMT scope 
of practice without applying for EMT certification and needs no further training and/or 
testing. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Initial EMT Certification – No prior California EMT certification 
 
A. Eligibility by completing initial EMT training 
 
1. Be eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
 
2. Complete an EMT basic course and obtain an EMT course completion 
record from an EMT training program approved by either: 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 3 OF 9 
 
a. A California LEMSA, or  
 
b. the EMS Authority, or 
 
c. An out-of-state EMT program which meets current California 
training requirements. 
 
3. Pass the NREMT EMT cognitive and psychomotor (skills) examination 
within the preceding two (2) years. 
 
4. Apply for certification within two (2) years of the date of EMT course 
completion. 
 
5. Possess a current CPR card equivalent to American Heart or Red Cross 
Basic Life Support, which is valid at least three months beyond the date a 
complete application is submitted. Online CPR courses are not accepted. 
 
6. Complete a live scan for a criminal history background report using the 
California Department of Justice Request for Live Scan Service form 
obtained from the EMS Agency web site. No other form shall be used. 
 
7. Complete and sign the current EMS Agency EMT Initial Certification 
Application. 
 
8. Disclose in a written statement, signed and dated, and include a minute 
order, docket report, statement of issues, or accusation for any and all: 
 
a. Certification, accreditation or licensure action(s) against a 
healthcare or healing arts certificate. 
 
b. Criminal history to include arrests, pending charges, and/or 
convictions. 
 
9. Pay the established fee. 
 
10. Submit all documentation listed above (original application and copies of 
all other documents) along with: 
 
a. Copy of government-issued identification with photograph (Driver 
License, California I.D. card, or Passport). 
 
b. Other health certifications or licenses. 
 
B. Eligibility with current EMT certification from another State 
 
1. All requirements listed in Section I. A. of this reference. 
 
2. Two (2) year requirement for course completion and application are 
waived. 
 
C. Eligibility with current EMT certification from the NREMT 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 4 OF 9 
 
1. All requirements listed in Section I. A. of this reference. 
 
2. Two (2) year requirement for course completion and application are 
waived. 
 
3. Two (2) year requirement for passing the NREMT EMT written and skills 
examinations are waived. 
 
D. Eligibility with a current and valid Advanced EMT (AEMT) or Paramedic 
certification from California, another State, or NREMT in good standing 
 
1. All requirements outlined in Section I.A.5-10 of this reference. 
 
2. Submit a copy of current certification(s) and/or license(s). 
 
E. Certification Issuance 
 
1. EMT shall be issued a wallet-sized certificate card with an effective date 
when all requirements have been met and reviewed by the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Expiration date shall be two (2) years to the end of the month from the 
date applicant completes all certification requirements. 
 
II. Renewal of California EMT Certification 
 
A. EMT certification is current and issued by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency, 
the following are required: 
 
1. During the current certification cycle, obtain twenty-four (24) hours of 
EMS education by one of the following: 
 
a. EMT Refresher course from an approved program, or  
 
b. EMS approved continuing education from a California approved 
EMS CE Provider or Commission on Accreditation for Pre-
Hospital Continuing Education (CAPCE) approval. 
 
i. A maximum of twelve (12) hours of EMS CE completed per 
day can be used towards the total CE hours required. Any 
hours over twelve (12) completed on one day will be 
disallowed. 
 
ii. A maximum of 12 hours of teaching or media-based 
education can be used towards the total CE hours 
required. 
 
iii. All CE hours must be relevant to EMS in the assessment 
and management of prehospital patient care. 
 
iv. Verification from a California approved paramedic training 
program which meets EMS education certificate 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 5 OF 9 
requirements documenting completion of didactic with the 
dates and hours signed by the program director. 
 
2. EMT SCV (EMSA-SCV 01/17) from an approved California provider 
within the past two (2) years. 
 
3. Current CPR card equivalent to American Heart or Red Cross Basic Life 
Support which is valid at least three months beyond the date an 
application is submitted. Online CPR courses are not accepted. 
 
4. Disclose in a written statement, signed and dated, and include the court 
minute order or docket report, statement of issues or accusation for any 
and all: 
 
a. Certification, accreditation or licensure action(s) against a 
healthcare or healing arts license. 
 
b. Criminal background history including arrests, convictions or 
pending charges. 
 
5. Complete and sign the current EMS Agency EMT Certification Renewal 
Application to include current EMS employer, if applicable. 
 
6. Pay the established fee. 
 
7. Submit all documentation listed above (original application and copies of 
all other documents) along with: 
 
a. Copy of government-issued identification with photograph (Driver 
License, California I.D. card, or Passport) 
 
b. Other health certification or licenses. 
 
B. EMT certification is current but not issued by the Los Angeles County EMS 
Agency, the following are required: 
 
1. Complete all requirements outlined in Section II. A. 1-4 of this reference. 
 
2. Submit a copy of current certification(s) and/or license(s). 
 
3. Complete a live scan for a criminal history background report using the 
California Department of Justice Request for Live Scan Service form 
obtained from the EMS Agency web site. No other form shall be used. 
Submit a copy of the Request for Live Scan Service form after performing 
live scan fingerprinting. 
 
C. Renewal Certification Issuance 
 
1. If renewal requirements are met less than six (6) months prior to 
expiration, EMT shall be issued a wallet-sized certificate card with an 
effective date immediately following the expiration date of the current 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 6 OF 9 
certificate. The expiration date shall be two (2) years from the date of the 
current certificate. OR 
 
2. If renewal requirements are met more than six (6) months prior to 
expiration, EMT shall be issued a wallet-sized certificate card EMT with 
an effective date when all requirements have been met and reviewed by 
the EMS Agency. The expiration date shall be two (2) years from the final 
day of the final month which recertification is issued. 
 
III. Reinstatement of an Expired California EMT Certification 
 
A. EMT certification issued by Los Angeles County EMS Agency with a lapse of less 
than six (6) months. 
 
1. Complete all requirements in Section II. A. of this reference. 
 
2. EMS education and EMT SCV submitted must be completed within the 
twenty-four (24) months prior to applying for reinstatement. 
 
B. EMT certification issued by another California EMT Certifying Entity with a lapse 
of less than six (6) months. 
 
Complete all requirements outlined in Section II. B. and III. A. of this reference. 
 
C. EMT certification issued by Los Angeles County EMS Agency with a lapse of six 
(6) months or more and less than twelve (12) months. 
 
1. Complete all requirements outlined in Section II. A. of this reference. 
 
2. Complete an additional 12 hours of EMS education for a total of thirty-six 
(36) hours. 
 
3. EMS education and EMT SCV submitted must be completed within the 
twenty-four (24) months prior to applying for reinstatement. 
 
D. EMT certification issued by another California EMT Certifying Entity with a lapse 
of six (6) months or more and less than twelve (12) months. 
 
Complete all requirements outlined in Section II. B. and III. C. of this reference. 
 
E. EMT certification with a lapse of twelve (12) months or more. 
 
1. Complete all requirements outlined in Section II. B. of this reference. 
 
2. Complete an additional 24 hours of EMS education for a total of forty-
eight (48) hours. 
 
3. EMS education and EMT SCV submitted must be completed within the 
twenty-four (24) months prior to applying for reinstatement. 
 
4. Pass the NREMT EMT cognitive and psychomotor examination within the 
preceding two (2) years or possess a current NREMT EMT certificate. 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 7 OF 9 
 
F. Renewal Certification Issuance 
 
1. EMT shall be issued a wallet-sized certificate card with an effective date 
when all requirements have been met and reviewed by the EMS Agency. 
 
2. The expiration date shall be two (2) years on the final day of the month 
which certification is issued. 
 
IV. California EMT certification renewal for members of the Armed Forces of the United 
States while deployed on active duty 
 
EMTs who are a member of the Armed Forces of the United States whose California 
EMT certificate expires during the time the individual is deployed on active duty or less 
than six (6) months from the date the individual is deactivated/released from active duty, 
shall receive six (6) months from the date of the individual’s release from active duty to 
complete the reinstatement requirements outlined in Section III. A. or III. B. of this 
reference, with the following provisions: 
 
A. Individual’s EMT certification expiration date applies. 
 
1. Certification expiration which occurs prior to deployment for active duty 
must meet reinstatement requirements according to the date of 
expiration. 
 
2. If certification expiration occurs while on active duty or within 6 months of 
release, the certificate shall be deemed expired. 
 
3. EMT with an expired certification shall not function as an EMT. 
 
4. Live Scan is required if certification expiration is twelve (12) months or 
greater. 
 
5. If the individual does not complete reinstatement requirements within six 
(6) months from active duty release, certification renewal requirements 
shall apply from the time of certification expiration. 
 
B. Provision to complete reinstatement requirements begins at the time of release 
from active duty. 
 
C. EMT shall submit documentation from their respective branch of the Armed 
Forces of the United States verifying membership and the individual’s dates of 
activation and release from active duty. 
 
D. Reinstatement of certification shall be issued as outlined in Section III. F. of this 
reference upon completing reinstatement requirements. 
 
V. EMT Disciplinary Action 
 
A. The EMS Agency medical director may deny, place on probation, suspend or 
revoke an EMT certification for the commission of a crime or act that is 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 8 OF 9 
considered substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the 
certificate holder and is evidence of a threat to the public health and safety. 
 
B. Any of the following actions, listed under the Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, 
Section 1798.200 (c), by EMS personnel shall be considered evidence of a threat to the 
public health and safety if found to be true, may result in probation, denial, suspension, 
or revocation of a certificate or license issued under Division 2.5: 
1. Fraud in the procurement of a certificate or license. 
 
2. Gross negligence. 
 
3. Repeated negligent acts. 
 
4. Incompetence. 
 
5. The commission of any fraudulent, dishonest, or corrupt act that is 
substantially related to the qualifications, functions, and duties of 
prehospital personnel. 
 
6. Conviction of any crime, which is substantially related to the 
qualifications, functions, and duties of prehospital personnel. The record 
of conviction or certified copy of the record shall be conclusive evidence 
of the conviction. 
 
7. Violating or attempting to violate directly or indirectly, or assisting in or 
abetting the violation of or conspiring to violate, any provision of Health 
and Safety Code Division 2.5 or regulations adopted by the EMS 
Authority pertaining to prehospital personnel. 
 
8. Violating or attempting to violate any federal or state statute or regulation 
that regulates narcotics, dangerous drugs or controlled substances. 
 
9. Addiction to, the excessive use of, or the misuse of, alcoholic beverages, 
narcotics, dangerous drugs, or controlled substances. 
 
10. Functioning outside the supervision of medical control in the field care 
system operating at the local level, except as authorized by any other 
license or certification. 
 
11. Demonstration of irrational behavior or occurrence of a physical disability 
to the extent that a reasonable and prudent person would have 
reasonable cause to believe that the ability to perform the duties normally 
expected may be impaired. 
 
12. Unprofessional conduct exhibited by any of the following: 
 
a. The mistreatment or physical abuse of any patient  resulting from 
force in excess of what a reasonable and prudent person trained 
and acting in a similar capacity while engaged in the performance 
of his or her duties would use if confronted with a similar 
circumstance. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit 
an EMT, Advanced EMT, or Paramedic from assisting a peace 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 1014 
CERTIFICATION 
 
PAGE 9 OF 9 
officer, or a peace officer who is acting in the dual capacity of 
peace officer and EMT, Advanced EMT, or Paramedic, from using 
force that is reasonably necessary to affect a lawful arrest or 
detention. 
b. The failure to maintain confidentiality or patient medical 
information,except as disclosure is otherwise permitted or required 
by law in Sections 56 to 56.6, inclusive, of the Civil Code.                                                                                                                                                           
 
c. The commission of any sexually related offense specified under 
Section 290 of the Penal Code. 
 
B. For any of the above actions the EMS Agency will evaluate and investigate the 
incidence and make a determination of certification action based on the 
provisions of Title 22, Division 9: Prehospital Emergency Services, Chapter 6.  
Process for EMT Disciplinary Action. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 214, Base Hospital and Provider Agency Reporting Responsibilities 
Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 802.1, EMT Scope of Practice (Table Format)
