# cms1 206093

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, HOSPITAL) 
SUBJECT: MOBILE MEDICAL SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT REFERENCE NO. 1140 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-04-10  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
   
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the release and deployment of Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency Mobile Medical System (MoMS) during a disaster or 
mass casualty event.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
MOBILE MEDICAL SYSTEM (MoMS): The MoMS consists of all mobile assets that can assist 
with a surge event. This includes; tents, generators, portable medical equipment, and HVACs. 
These mobile assets can be deployed independently of each other, either as a stand-alone 
alternate care site or augment an existing treatment site such as a hospital. 
 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The EMS Agency maintains and stores the MoMS at the County Disaster Staging 
Facility. 
 
2. The overall authority to deploy the MoMS rests with the EMS Agency, who will 
coordinate the response and deployment. 
 
3. The MoMS is intended as a disaster recovery asset and should not be considered a 
rapid response unit 
 
4. In situations where the EMS Agency receives several requests, the EMS Agency shall 
deploy the MoMS (components) to the area(s) of greatest need or benefit. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The MoMS may be deployed in the following capacities: 
 
A. Replacement infrastructure – at an existing hospital that is physically damaged 
but retains in-house staffing capabilities. 
 
B. Surge capacity supplement – at an existing hospital that may have far 
exceeded its normal patient capacity where healthcare demands continue to rise. 
 
C. Alternate Care Site – in an open space independent from any existing or 
supporting hospital. 
 
D. Pre-deployment asset – for a significant event or large gathering where there is 
a possibility of localized patient surge (i.e., Tournament of Roses, incident of 
national significance, etc.). Medical treatment staff and medical supplies will be 
the responsibility of the requesting hospital. 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILE MEDICAL SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT REFERENCE NO. 1140 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
NOTE: A pre-deployment request must be submitted at least two months in 
advance of the event scheduled date and approved by the EMS Agency.   
 
E. Training and demonstration events –MoMS components may be set up to 
maintain staff proficiency, or to exhibit at public relations events, such as health 
fairs. 
 
II. Role of the EMS Agency 
 
A. Prioritize requests for deployment. 
 
B. Work with requesting hospital site managers regarding issues such as staffing, 
re-supply, security, communication, patient movement, etc. 
 
C. Deliver the MoMS to the requested site and assist with deployment. 
 
D. Provide logistical support for the duration of deployment. This involves all 
mechanical/maintenance issues. 
 
E. Provide just-in-time training to medical/support staff regarding MoMS equipment 
and safety considerations. 
 
F. If deployment of the MoMS alters traditional ambulance destinations and 
transport times during a surge event, the EMS Agency will notify base hospitals 
and EMS providers of any alterations to traditional patient destinations and 
receiving facilities. 
 
III. Role of Base Hospitals 
 
Direct patient destinations in accordance with any patient destination alterations, as 
directed by the EMS Agency. 
 
IV. Role of LA County Provider Agencies 
 
Transport patients in accordance with any patient destination alterations, as directed by 
the EMS Agency. 
 
 V. Role of the Requesting Hospital 
 
A. Real event – 
a. Submit a Resource Request via ReddiNet 
 
b. If no response within 15 minutes - Notify the EMS Agency via the MAC by 
telephone at (562) 378-1789 ReddiNet, or VMED28 of a possible patient 
surge event to request additional medical treatment resources. 
 
c. The hospital shall provide the MAC with the following information: 
 
i. Contact person (Incident Commander or Liaison Officer), include call 
back number and email address 
 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILE MEDICAL SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT REFERENCE NO. 1140 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
ii. Hospital Service Level, which should be one of the following: 
 
1) Modified Services (orange)-Some assistance needed 
2) Limited Services (red)- Significant assistance needed 
 
NOTE: Normal operations (green), Under Control (yellow) and No 
Services (black) would not warrant deployment of MoMS 
components. 
 
iii. Support requested 
1) Tents 
2) Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning units (HVAC) 
3) Generators 
4) Ventilators 
5) Portable suction machines  
6) Cardiac monitors/defibrillators  
7) IV pumps  
8) Oxygen Concentrators (Bottle Fill)  
9) Cots  
10) Gurneys  
11) Bedside lab equipment 
 
B. Meet with EMS Agency team when MoMS assets arrive.  
 
a. Identify area for equipment drop off prior to arrival 
 
b. Provide staff to operate the equipment and receive Just-in-Time Training  
 
c. Review deployment requirements 
 
d. Sign for receipt of equipment and deployment requirements 
acknowledgement 
 
e. Review demobilization requirements 
 
C. Provide wrap-around services such as: 
 
i. Fuel (diesel)  
ii. Site security 
iii. Site safety 
iv. Medical equipment and supplies as necessary 
v. Staffing 
 
D. Maintain equipment per instructions provided by EMS Agency  
 
E. Coordinate Demobilizations per instructions provide by the EMS Agency 
 
NOTE: Costs may be incurred for a disaster deployment or planned event and these costs may 
be passed on to the entity requesting the use of the MoMS assets on a case-by-case basis.  
 
 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILE MEDICAL SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT REFERENCE NO. 1140 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents
