# cms1 206239

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: SEXUAL ASSAULT PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 508 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 03-31-97 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for transporting patients who are alleged victims of sexual 
assault to the most accessible medical facility appropriate to their needs. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Sexual Assault Patient: A person who states they were sexually assaulted or a person 
suspected by the 9-1-1 personnel to have been the victim of a sexual assault. 
 
Sexual Assault Response Team (SART): A coordinated interdisciplinary intervention model 
between law enforcement, crime laboratory, District Attorney’s Office, medical and advocacy 
experts to meet the forensic needs of the criminal justice system and the medical and emotional 
needs of the sexual assault patient. 
 
Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) Center: A hospital sponsored program that is 
designated by the EMS Agency to receive patients who are victims of sexual assault/abuse. A 
SART Center specializes in forensic examinations in the case of an acute sexual assault/abuse 
event (defined as occurring within 120 hours), which has the capabilities of providing 
comprehensive medical forensic examinations and psychological support. The center consists 
of knowledgeable staff whose training, expertise, and state-of-the-art equipment exceeds the 
community standards. 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
1. When considering which facility is most appropriate to the needs of the sexual assault 
patient, the importance of evidence collection for legal proceedings should be one of the 
factors considered. However, in all cases, the health and well-being of the patient is the 
overriding consideration in determining hospital destination. 
 
2. 9-1-1 Receiving Hospitals should have an internal policy for contacting and reporting to 
the law enforcement agency where the sexual assault occurred, any patient who is a 
victim of sexual assault for evidence collection. The law enforcement agency will 
determine the appropriate SART Center to conduct the forensic examination and will 
contact the SART Center to coordinate the exam. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Sexual assault patients who deny physical injuries and who do not meet base hospital 
contact and transport criteria may be released at the scene to the local law enforcement 
agency for appropriate follow-up. Law enforcement personnel are highly encouraged to 
transport these patients to a designated SART Center. EMS personnel shall document 
on the EMS Report Form to whom the patient was released. 
 

SUBJECT: SEXUAL ASSAULT PATIENT DESTINATION  REFERENCE NO. 508 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
II. Every effort should be made to transport sexual assault patients who meet base hospital 
contact and transport criteria to a specialty care center that has an affiliated designated 
SART Center. If EMS personnel determine that such a transport would unreasonably 
remove the transport unit from its primary response area, the patient should be 
transported to the most accessible receiving (MAR) facility. 
 
III. EMS personnel shall notify the local law enforcement agency of sexual assault patients 
regardless of whether the patient complains of physical injuries. EMS personnel shall 
document on the EMS Report Form to whom the incident was reported. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 501, Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506,  Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 508.1 SART Center Roster 
Ref. No. 1200.2, Base Contact Requirements
