# cms1 219551

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: MOBILIZATION OF MEDICAL/SURGICAL 
 SUPPLY (M/SS) CACHES REFERENCE NO. 1107 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-14  PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  04-01-23  
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the release and return of Medical/Surgical Supply (M/SS) 
cache to designated personnel during times of medical need. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The County of Los Angeles has thirteen (13) M/SS caches stored at Disaster Resource 
Centers (DRC) throughout the County. 
 
2. The authority to deploy the M/SS caches or portions of its contents to the field, local hospitals, 
and/or dispensing sites rests with the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. In a major incident which results in a need for additional medical supplies, 
EMS/hospital/healthcare facility personnel shall request for the deployment of the M/SS cache 
by contacting the EMS Agency via the Medical Alert Center (MAC), ReddiNet, VMED28 
Radio:155.34mhz, or telephone at (866) 940-4401. 
 
II. Once approved for deployment, the following should occur: 
 
A. EMS Agency shall: 
1. Obtain the recipient’s point of contact (POC) information (name, phone number); 
and 
 
2. Contact the DRC, identify they are from the EMS Agency and provide their name, 
operator number, and a phone number where they can be contacted; and 
 
3. Provide the DRC with the name of the recipient’s POC and phone number of the 
individual(s) who will be picking up the M/SS cache; and 
 
4. Advise the DRC to contact the recipient to make arrangements for pick-up. 
 
B. DRC shall: 
1. Contact recipient’s POC 
 
2. Determine the following: 
a. Arrange for time of pick-up; and 
b. Provide instructions on pick-up location; and 
c. Provide DRC POC name and phone number 
 
C.  Recipient shall: 
 
1. Upon arrival at the storage facility will contact DRC POC; and 
 

SUBJECT: MOBILIZATION OF MEDICAL/SURGICAL 
 SUPPLY (M/SS) CACHES REFERENCE NO. 1107 
 
  
PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
2. Provide their facility or government issued photo identification to the DRC POC; 
and 
 
3. Be provided access to the M/SS cache; and 
 
4. Sign the required form(s) acknowledging the receipt of the M/SS cache. 
 
III. Returning M/SS Cache 
 
1. Recipient will make arrangements with DRC POC for the return of borrowed M/SS 
cache 
 
2. Recipient will replace all used M/SS cache items to the same par level received at 
the expense of the recipient. Opened or damaged containers shall not be returned 
and will need to be replaced by the recipient. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 1107.1, M/SS Cache Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed
