# cms1 206078

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (HOSPITAL) 
SUBJECT: HOSPITAL EVACUATION  REFERENCE NO. 1112 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-08 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-09 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To define the role of each hospital and the Emergency Medical Services 
Agency in hospital evacuation(s) and to provide guidelines for requesting and 
mobilizing resources during disasters that result in partial or complete 
hospital evacuation(s). 
 
AUTHORITY:  Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, Environment 
of Care, Emergency Management Standards 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Partial Evacuation: Patients are transferred within the hospital. This can be done as a 
horizontal evacuation, which involves moving patients horizontally to one side of a set of fire 
barrier doors or as a vertical evacuation, which involves moving patients to a safe area on 
another floor. 
 
Full Evacuation: Patients are transferred from the facility to an outside area, another hospital or 
other alternative facility. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Evacuation of a hospital may be necessary following an emergency such as a facility fire 
or damage from a natural disaster, such as an earthquake. 
 
2. The decision to evacuate a hospital will be based on the ability of the hospital to meet 
the medical needs of the patients. Immediate threats to life, such as internal fires or 
unstable structures will require emergent evacuation. Prolonged utilities disruptions may 
also result in the need to evacuate a hospital. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Specific Responsibilities of a Hospital Requiring Evacuation 
 
A. Implement emergency management plan that addresses evacuation. 
 
B. Provide education to staff regarding their role and the process that will be used to 
evacuate the facility. 
 
C. Relocate patients to area out of “danger”. 
 
D. If patients need to be transferred to another facility for on-going medical care, 
available beds should be identified by the following procedures: 
 
1. Coordinate with other hospitals in same hospital system (Kaiser, Catholic 
Healthcare West, etc.). 

SUBJECT: HOSPITAL EVACUATION  REFERENCE NO. 1112 
 
  PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
2. Coordinate with Disaster Resource Center/umbrella hospital 
organizations. 
 
3. If the above resources are unavailable or inadequate request assistance 
from the County Department of Health Services Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency. 
 
a. Contact the Medical Alert Center (MAC) or Department 
Operations Center (DOC) at 866-940-4401-Press 1. 
 
b. Provide the number of patients by type of bed (critical care, 
medical/surgical, pediatrics, etc.) that require evacuation. 
 
E. Obtain transportation resources to affect the transportation of the evacuated 
patients. Available transportation resources should be identified by the following 
procedures: 
 
1. Evacuating hospital will contact their contracted ambulance provider to 
assist in the transportation of evacuated patients. 
 
2. If additional resources are needed request assistance from the County 
through the EMS Agency. 
 
F. Transferred patients should have their medical records and medications sent with 
them. 
 
G. Maintain a log of transferred patients that includes the following information: 
 
1. Name of patient 
 
2. Facility transferred to 
 
3. Type of service (i.e. medical/surgical, ICU, etc.) 
 
4. Equipment sent with patient (i.e. IV pump, ventilator, wheelchair, etc.) 
 
5. Mode of transportation 
 
II. Specific Responsibilities of the EMS Agency 
 
A. Coordinate the overall Medical and Health resources in the County. 
 
1. Poll all hospitals to determine their ability to take transfers or their need to 
evacuate their facility. 
 
2. Notify Public Health of pending hospital evacuation(s) at (213) 989-7140. 
 
3. Notify jurisdictional fire department and law enforcement agency to 
coordinate and ensure evacuation routes minimize any risks associated 
with the evacuation. 
 
B. Provide transportation resources 

SUBJECT: HOSPITAL EVACUATION  REFERENCE NO. 1112 
 
  PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
1. Deploy local ambulance resources, if additional resources needed activate 
local Ambulance Strike Teams (AST) or consider alternate transportation 
(i.e. buses). 
 
2. If the above is inadequate, request transportation resources from Region I 
and/or the State. 
 
C. Provide the individual hospital being evacuated with the following information: 
 
1. Patient destination information including the number of patients by type to 
each facility. 
 
2. Transportation resources being dispatched and the estimated time of 
arrival.
