# cms1 206221

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: AMBULANCE LICENSING ADMINISTRATIVE REFERENCE NO. 452 
 FINE HEARING PROCESS 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-12  PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 10-01-21  
SUPERSEDES: 03-14-18 
 
 
APPROVED:  ________________________   _________________________ 
 Director, EMS Agency                Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE:  To outline a process for requesting an administrative hearing to contest the 
imposition and/or amount of an Administrative Fine. 
 
AUTHORITY: Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Ambulance Ordinance 
7.16.020 
Health & Safety Code 1797.170, 1797.172, 1797.204, 1797.224 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100062, 100063, 100145, 
100169 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Hearing Officer: The person appointed by the Director to conduct the administrative hearings.  
The Hearing Officer shall not be the enforcement officer who issued the notice of violation that is 
the subject of the administrative hearing or their immediate supervisor. 
 
Notice of Administrative Fine: Imposition of a fine issued by the Director of the EMS Agency 
pursuant to a violation of the Ambulance Ordinance. Administrative fines may be issued for 
Administrative, Operational, or Personnel violations (refer to Ref. No. 451.1, Ambulance 
Administrative Fines). 
 
Notice of Violation: Issued to an operator, attendant, or driver by an enforcement officer who 
has determined that a violation of any provision of the Ambulance Ordinance has occurred. The 
violation may subject the operator or EMS personnel to an administrative fine. 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
An appeal and hearing process provides a basic level of fairness, respects the rights of 
ambulance operators and personnel, and ensures due process whenever there is an adverse 
action involving a provider. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Procedure to Request an Administrative Hearing 
 
A. Ambulance operators   or personnel served with a Notice of Administrative Fine 
may request an administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest the 
imposition and/or amount of the fine. 
 
1. Submit a written request to the EMS Agency Director within ten (10) 
calendar days following service of the fine. 
 
a. Include a statement indicating the basis on which the operator 
contests the imposition of the fine, and 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE LICENSING ADMINISTRATIVE REFERENCE NO. 452 
 FINE HEARING PROCESS 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
b. Include any evidence the operator would like the Hearing Officer 
to consider. 
 
2. Submit a deposit equal to the full amount of the administrative fine with 
the written request. 
 
a. Fines may be paid in person by cash, check, or money order. 
 
b. Fines submitted by mail shall be by check or money order only, 
payable to: 
 
County of Los Angeles – EMS Agency 
10100 Pioneer Blvd., Suite 200 
Santa Fe Springs, CA 90670 
Attn:  Finance Section 
 
3. Failure to deposit the fine amount concurrently with the request for an 
administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the 
operator/personnel’s entitlement to the administrative hearing. 
 
4. The hearing request and fee deposit are considered filed on the date 
received by the EMS Agency. 
 
B. Following receipt of the hearing request and the full amount of the fine deposit, 
the EMS Agency shall schedule an administrative hearing. 
 
1. The operator/personnel shall be given no less than ten (10) calendar 
days’ prior written notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
 
2. The operator/personnel shall be provided with the name of the Hearing 
Officer. 
 
II. Administrative Hearing Procedures  
 
A. The EMS Agency Director shall appoint the Hearing Officer. 
 
B. Hearings shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer on the date, time, and place 
specified in the notice. 
 
C. The operator/personnel have the opportunity to present evidence relevant to the 
Hearing Officer’s determination of the matter. 
 
D. Request for Continuance 
 
1. At their discretion, and upon written request and a showing of good 
cause, the Hearing Officer may grant a continuance of the hearing date. 
 
2. The Hearing Officer must receive the request for continuance at least two 
(2) business days prior to the hearing. 
 

SUBJECT: AMBULANCE LICENSING ADMINISTRATIVE REFERENCE NO. 452 
 FINE HEARING PROCESS 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
3. The continuance shall not be longer than forty-five (45) calendar days 
from the originally scheduled hearing date. 
 
E. Hearing Abandonment 
 
1. If the operator/personnel fail to appear at the administrative hearing, it is 
considered an abandonment of the hearing request and a failure to 
exhaust administrative remedies to judicially challenge the imposition of 
the administrative fine.  
 
2. If the administrative hearing is abandoned, the EMS Agency retains the 
funds deposited with the hearing request. 
 
3. The Notice of Violation, Notice of Administrative Fine, and any other 
reports prepared by or for the enforcement officer concerning the code 
violation shall be accepted by the Hearing Officer as prima facie evidence 
of the code violation and the facts stated in those documents. 
 
III.   Hearing Decision 
 
A. The Hearing Officer shall consider all the evidence and testimony submitted at 
the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, and within ten (10) calendar days 
the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision that confirms or cancels the 
administrative fine. 
 
B. The written decision shall include a statement of the reasons for the decision and 
shall be served personally or by first-class (certified) mail. 
 
C. The Hearing Officer’s written decision shall constitute the final administrative 
decision of the County. 
 
D. If the hearing confirms the imposition of the full amount of the administrative fine, 
the EMS Agency shall keep the funds deposited with the hearing request. 
 
E. If the Hearing Officer cancels the administrative fine, the EMS Agency shall 
refund the entire amount of the funds deposited with the hearing request to the 
operator or personnel within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the 
written decision. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 450, Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Division 2, Chapter 
7.16 Ambulances 
Ref. No. 451, Ambulance Licensing Notices of Violation and Administrative Fines 
Ref. No. 451.1, Ambulance Licensing Administrative Fines 
Ref. No. 451.2, Notice of Violation – Administrative 
Ref. No. 451.3, Notice of Violation – Operational 
Ref. No. 451.4, Notice of Violation – Ambulance Personnel 
Ref. No. 453, Ambulance Licensing Investigations
