# cms1 206279

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES    
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF REFERENCE NO. 607 
 PREHOSPITAL DATA 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12-01-09       PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED:  01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish procedures for the submission of electronic data by prehospital 
care providers. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Assembly Bill No. 1129 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 4, Sections 100169, 100170 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 2009 
Health and Safety Code, Section 130202 
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act 
(HITECH) 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Electronic Data: Patient Care Records submitted in electronic format (as per LA-EMS NEMSIS 
Data Dictionary) or field electronic Patient Care Records (ePCRs). 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. All submission of electronic personal health information (PHI) shall be in compliance with 
HIPPA regulations. 
 
2. PCRs require redundant back-up and emergency down time procedures. 
 
3. The provider agency will ensure that the electronic data is compliant with the EMS 
Agency’s data system requirement. 
 
4. All vendors must be compliant with the current versions of the California Emergency 
Medical Services Information System (CEMSIS) and the National Emergency Medical 
Services Information System (NEMSIS) standards.  Provider agencies cannot utilize an 
ePCR until their selected vendor has been approved to submit data electronically to the 
EMS Agency.   
 
5. All public and exclusive operating area (EOA) provider agencies and private advanced 
life support (ALS), specialty care transport (SCT) who make base contact, shall submit 
data electronically, which meets the LA-EMS NEMSIS Data Dictionary requirements, to 
the EMS Agency. 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Provider Agency Responsibilities 
 
A. Prior to implementation of an Electronic Data System 
 

SUBJECT: ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF REFERENCE NO. 607 
 PREHOSPITAL DATA 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
1. Electronic Data Submission Plan 
 
Submit a plan, approved by the department’s Fire Chief or private 
provider agency’s Chief Executive Officer, to the EMS Agency for 
approval which includes: 
 
a. Ability to transmit data to the EMS Agency which meets the LA- 
EMS NEMSIS Data Dictionary requirements. 
 
b. A successful mechanism to provide immediate transfer of patient 
information to additional providers, including transporting agency 
(if necessary). 
 
c. System to ensure a Patient Care Record is created by each EMS 
provider for every EMS response regardless of patient disposition. 
 
i. If two (2) or more units from the same EMS provider 
are dispatched, at least one (1) EMS field personnel is 
required to initiate and complete an ePCR. 
 
ii. If two (2) or more units from different EMS providers 
are dispatched and patient care information can be 
shared electronically, at least one (1) EMS field 
personnel is required to initiate and complete an ePCR. 
 
iii. If two (2) or more units from different EMS providers 
are dispatched and patient care information cannot be 
shared electronically, at least one (1) EMS field 
personnel from each EMS provider is required to 
initiate and complete an ePCR. 
 
 
d. Process for confirming that an ePCR has been successfully 
generated for each patient. 
 
e. A successful mechanism for receiving facilities to have the 
electronic record available upon the patient’s transfer of care and 
any patient care related revisions made after leaving the receiving 
facility. 
 
f. Back-up system available in case of system failure. 
 
g. Staff members assigned to act as a liaison between the vendor 
and the EMS Agency to identify and correct data issues. 
 
2. Notify the EMS Agency’s Data Systems Management Chief once a 
vendor has been selected and provide an estimated field implementation 
date. 
 
3. Notify all hospitals that provider transports to of the intent to convert to an 
ePCR system and the tentative start date. 

SUBJECT: ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF REFERENCE NO. 607 
 PREHOSPITAL DATA 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
 
B. Implementation 
 
1. Ensure the selected vendor contacts the EMS Agency’s Data Systems 
Management Chief to discuss the data format, transmission procedures 
and obtain sequence number format. 
 
2. Maintain a staff member to act as liaison between the vendor and the 
EMS Agency to identify and correct data issues. 
 
3. Submit validated test files, meeting the LA-EMS NEMSIS Data Dictionary 
and LA-EMS Schematron, and the corresponding copies of the ePCRs in 
PDF format, that accurately reflect the documentation in the electronic 
record upon import. 
 
C. Ongoing 
 
1. Transmit validated data to the EMS Agency for import into the ESO 
Repository within 48 hours of the incident date. Files with validation errors 
will be rejected and must be corrected and re-transmitted prior to import. 
 
2. Address and correct data related issues as they arise. 
 
3. Implement annual data field and export program changes within three 
months of publication. 
 
II. EMS Agency Responsibilities 
 
A. Review and approve the electronic data submission plan. 
 
B. Liaison with the provider agency and receiving hospital(s) to establish a mutually 
agreed upon method by which the receiving hospital(s) will obtain the ePCR. 
 
C. Meet with the provider agency and vendor to review electronic data submission 
plan and provide the Sequence Number formatting, LA-EMS NEMSIS Data 
Dictionary and LA-EMS Schematron 
 
D. Review validated test files, and the corresponding copies of the ePCR in PDF 
format, for completeness and accuracy and provide a report to the provider 
agency and vendor with noted deficiencies. 
 
E. Ongoing 
 
1. Monitor incoming data and notify the provider as issues arise and follow 
up with provider as needed to ensure data issues are addressed and 
resolved. 
 
2. Present data field changes annually to the Provider Agency Advisory 
Committee. 
 
 

SUBJECT: ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF REFERENCE NO. 607 
 PREHOSPITAL DATA 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 602, Confidentiality of Patient Information 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 608, Retention and Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
 
LA-EMS NEMSIS Data Dictionary 
LA-EMS Schematron
