# cms1 238671

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: STROKE PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 521 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 04-01-09  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 10-01-24  
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for transporting suspected stroke patients to the most 
accessible facility appropriate to their needs. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1798 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Primary Stroke Center (PSC): A 9-1-1 receiving hospital that has met the standards of a 
Center for Medicaid & Medicare Services (CMS) approved accreditation body as a Primary 
Stroke Center and has been approved as a Stroke Center by the Los Angeles (LA) County 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency. 
 
Comprehensive Stroke Center (CSC): A 9-1-1 receiving hospital that has met the standards of 
a CMS approved accreditation body as a Comprehensive (Level I CSC) or Thrombectomy 
Capable Stroke Center (Level II CSC) and has been approved as a Comprehensive Stroke 
Center by the LA County EMS Agency. CSCs have subspecialty neurology and 
neurointerventional physicians available 24 hours a day and 7 days a week who can perform 
clot-removing procedures (i.e., thrombectomy). 
 
Last Known Well Time: The time (military time) at which the patient was last known to 
be without the signs and symptoms of the current stroke or at his or her prior baseline. 
 
Local Neurological Signs: Signs and symptoms that may indicate a dysfunction in the nervous 
system such as a stroke or mass lesion. These signs include: speech and language 
disturbances, altered level of consciousness, unilateral weakness, unilateral numbness, new 
onset seizures, dizziness, and visual disturbances. 
 
Modified Los Angeles Prehospital Stroke Screen (mLAPSS): A screening tool utilized by 
prehospital care providers to assist in identifying patients who may be having a stroke. 
 
Los Angeles Motor Score (LAMS): A scoring tool utilized by prehospital care providers to 
determine the severity of stroke on patients with suspected stroke. A large vessel involvement is 
suspected if the total LAMS score from the three categories is 4 or greater. 
 
Mobile Stroke Unit (MSU): Mobile specialized stroke unit as approved by the LA County 
EMS Agency and defined in Ref. No. 817, Regional Mobile Response Teams. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Patients experiencing a stroke should be transported to the most accessible facility 
appropriate to their needs. This determination will be made by the base hospital 
physician, Mobile Intensive Care Nurse or MSU physician after consideration of the 
guidelines established in this policy.  
 

SUBJECT: STROKE PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 521 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
2. Basic Life Support units shall call an Advanced Life Support unit for suspected stroke 
patients. 
 
3. In all cases, the health and well-being of the patient is the overriding consideration in 
determining patient destination. Factors to be considered include: severity and stability 
of the patient’s condition; anticipation of transport time; available transport resources; 
and request by the patient, family, guardian, or physician. 
 
4. Service area rules and/or considerations do not apply to suspected stroke patients. 
 
5. Patients with a history of previous stroke with new or worsening deficits should be routed 
to the Stroke Center according to this policy. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibility of the Provider Agency 
 
A. Perform mLAPSS on all patients exhibiting neurological signs. The mLAPSS is 
positive if all of the following criteria are met: 
 
1. No history of seizures or epilepsy 
 
2. Age 40 years or older 
 
3. At baseline, patient is not wheelchair bound or bedridden 
 
4. Blood glucose between 60 and 400 mg/dL 
 
5. Obvious asymmetry-unilateral weakness with any of the following motor 
exams: 
a. Facial Smile/Grimace 
b. Grip 
c. Arm Strength 
 
B. Perform LAMS on ALL patients with suspected stroke 
 
1. Facial droop   Total Possible Score = 1 
a. Absent = 0 
b. Present = 1 
 
2. Arm drift    Total Possible Score = 2 
a. Absent = 0 
b. Drifts down = 1 
c. Falls rapidly = 2 
 
3. Grip strength   Total Possible Score = 2 
a. Normal = 0 
b. Weak grip = 1 
c. No grip = 2 
 
C. Transport the patient to the most appropriate stroke center in accordance with 
base hospital direction or section III of this policy. 
 

SUBJECT: STROKE PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 521 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
D. Document the results of mLAPSS, LAMS, and last known well date and time in 
the designated areas on the Patient Care Record. 
 
E. In order to ensure that proper consent for treatment can be obtained by hospital 
personnel, if possible, verbally report to the Base hospital and document the 
name and contact information of the family member, caregiver, or witness who 
can help verify the patient’s last known well time in the Comments area of the 
Patient Care Record. When practical, transport the witness with the patient. 
 
II. Responsibility of the Base Hospital 
 
A. Provide medical direction and destination for all patients who meet mLAPSS 
criteria or have symptoms strongly suggestive of a stroke. 
 
B. Determine patient destination based on stroke center status via the ReddiNet® 
system and section IV of this policy. 
 
C. Notify the receiving stroke center if the base hospital is not the patient’s 
destination. 
 
D. Document the results of mLAPSS, LAMS, and last known well date and time in 
the designated areas on the Base Hospital Form. 
 
E. Prompt prehospital care personnel to obtain and document witness contact 
information on the Patient Care Record. 
 
III. Destination of Stroke Patients assessed and treated by EMS providers: 
 
A. All patients who have a LKWT within 24 hours with a positive mLAPSS and/or a 
provider impression of stroke shall be transported to a LA County EMS Agency 
designated stroke center as follows: 
 
1. Patients with a LAMS of 3 or less shall be transported to the closest stroke 
center (PSC or CSC). 
 
2. Patients with a LAMS of 4 or greater shall be transported to the closest Level 
I or II CSC. If transport time to the CSC is greater than 30 minutes, the 
patient shall be transported to the most accessible PSC. 
 
IV. Destination of Stroke Patients assessed and treated by a Mobile Stroke Unit (MSU): 
 
A. Ischemic stroke patients with CT imaging demonstrating a large vessel occlusion 
shall be transported to the closest Level I or II CSC. 
 
B. The following patients shall be transported to the closest Level I CSC: 
 
1. Hemorrhagic Stroke 
2. Intraparenchymal or subarachnoid hemorrhage demonstrated on non-
contrast CT 
3. Subdural or epidural hemorrhage 
4. Pathology needing emergency neurosurgical intervention 
 
  If transport time to the Level I CSC is greater than 30 minutes, the patient shall  

SUBJECT: STROKE PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 521 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
  be transported to the most accessible comprehensive stroke center (Level I or II). 
 
C. Destination for patients with a positive mLAPSS whose LKWT is greater than 24 
hours will be determined by the base hospital (i.e., consider stroke center 
destination if patient may benefit from stroke evaluation and management). 
 
D. If there are no stroke centers (PSC or CSC) that are accessible by transport 
within the maximum allowable time of 30 minutes, the patient shall be 
transported to the most accessible receiving facility. 
 
V. Ground transport is the preferred method of transport. Considerations for dispatching 
air ambulance transport shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
 
A. Geographic isolation of incident location (e.g., Antelope Valley, Malibu, Gorman, 
Catalina Island) 
 
B. Immediate availability of air ambulance 
 
C. Accessibility of a fully licensed and permitted helipad at the stroke center 
 
D. Transport capability from helipad to the emergency department of the stroke center 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 322, Stroke Receiving Center Standards 
Ref. No. 501, Hospital Directory 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Units 
Ref. No, 517, Regional Mobile Response Teams 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols 
Ref. No. 1232,  Stroke/Acute Neurological Deficits
