# cms1 206088

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(HOSPITALS, CLINICS) 
SUBJECT: AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS REFERENCE NO. 1132 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-12  PAGE 1 of 5 
REVISED:  04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
  
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE:  To provide guidelines on the use of Amateur Radio Operators (ARO) and 
equipment. 
AUTHORITY: Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 97 Amateur Radio Service 
DEFINITIONS: 
Medical Coordination Center (MCC): Los Angeles County Department of Health Services 
Emergency Medical Services Agency’s MCC. 
In-Net: Radio communication within the Net. 
Net: A group of radio operators that communicate with each other on a designated radio 
frequency to achieve a specific goal. 
Net Control: Directs all radio communications of a “Net” and manages the sequence of radio 
traffic to achieve an efficient and orderly “Net” to accomplish the goal. 
Out-of-Net: Radio communication outside of the Net. 
PRINCIPLES: 
1. AROs provide back-up communications for the EMS Agency and healthcare facilities 
when other communication equipment becomes inoperable. 
 
2. AROs are unpaid volunteers and will function under the direction of the requesting 
facility’s command structure. FCC regulations Part 97 prohibit AROs from charging fees 
for their services as communicators on amateur radio frequencies. 
 
3. AROs can be hospital personnel with an amateur radio license, a member of Amateur 
Radio Emergency Service (ARES) organization or other amateur radio organizations. 
 
4. AROs may deploy to the requesting facility with their own radio equipment. 
 
5. AROs communicate using common terminology and clear text with all transmissions. 
 
6. Medical and health related communication will be directed to the MCC whenever 
possible. 
 
7. Non-medical and health related communication will be directed to the city Emergency 
Operations Center (EOC) where the facility is geographically located. 

SUBJECT: AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS REFERENCE NO. 1132 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
PAGE 2 OF 5 
POLICY: 
I. Personnel 
 
A. AROs will complete the following recommended training: 
 
1. IS-100, Introduction to Incident Command System or equivalent. 
 
2. Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) course or 
equivalent. 
 
3. Assigned healthcare facility specific training. 
 
B. Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) Organization will: 
 
1. Provide a pool of specialized AROs dedicated to support the EMS 
Agency and healthcare facilities in LA County. 
 
2. Pre-assign AROs to the EMS Agency and participating healthcare 
facilities. 
 
3. Collaborate with authorized representatives of participating healthcare 
facilities to ensure the specialized AROs being pre-assigned meet the 
standards of the healthcare organization and have the healthcare 
organization’s approval for assignment. 
 
4. Coordinate the deployment of AROs to the EMS Agency and requesting 
healthcare facilities. 
 
5. Encourage AROs to participate in drills and exercises at their assigned 
healthcare facilities. 
 
6. AROs must display ARES and/or healthcare facility issued photo ID care 
per healthcare facility’s policy. 
 
7. Provide contact information to the EMS Agency and healthcare facility of 
AROs assigned to provide radio support to the agency and specific 
healthcare facility. These will include but not limited to: 
 
a. Home phone number 
 
b. Cell phone number 
 
c. E-mail address 
 

SUBJECT: AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS REFERENCE NO. 1132 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
PAGE 3 OF 5 
d. Amateur radio license number 
 
II. Equipment 
 
A. AROs will deploy with their own radio equipment but may also use the requesting 
facility’s radio equipment. 
 
B. Recommended healthcare facility equipment includes: 
 
1. Multi-band transceiver (2 meter and 70 centimeter) 
 
2. Antenna (for 2 meter and 70 centimeter bands) 
 
3. Radios with High Frequency capability for Disaster Resource Centers 
 
4. Appropriate 110 volts ac to 12 volts dc power supply, preferably with 
power pole connectors to allow connection to ARO provided radio 
equipment. 
 
III. Activation 
 
A. EMS Agency  MCC 
 
1. EMS Agency will request ARO through ARES using established 
notification protocol. 
 
2. ARES will dispatch an ARO(s) Net Control operator to theMCC. 
 
3. ARO will report to the MCC and function under the direction of the 
Medical Alert Center (MAC) Group Supervisor or designee. 
 
B. Healthcare Facility 
 
1. Facility will contact their assigned ARO.   
 
2. Facilities that have an internal amateur radio group, e.g., Kaiser 
Permanente Amateur Radio Network (KPARN), should follow their 
internal activation process. 
 
3. If these facilities do not have available AROs, they will submit a request to 
the  MCC for ARO support. 
 
4. During a large scale incident, e.g. major earthquake, the ARO will contact 
their assigned healthcare facility. If the ARO is unable to contact their 

SUBJECT: AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS REFERENCE NO. 1132 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
PAGE 4 OF 5 
assigned facility, they will self-deploy to the facility after notifying the 
ARES Net Control operator. 
 
5. ARO will report to the facility command center and function under the 
directions of the communications unit leader or designee. 
 
IV. Amateur Radio Traffic Flow 
 
A. Radio frequency designation will be determined by ARES and will primarily occur 
on the 2 meter or 70 centimeter bands.  
 
B. Net Control will be determined by the MCC based upon the location and nature 
of the incident. There will be a minimum of one Net Control operator per district 
impacted by the incident. 
 
C. AROs operating in healthcare facilities will communicate with their respective Net 
Control District. 
 
D. City of Long Beach (LBC): 
 
1. An ARO will be assigned to the City of Long Beach’s Emergency 
Operations Center (EOC). All infrastructure related communication for 
healthcare facilities within the city will be directed to the LBC’s EOC. 
Medical and Health related communications (hospital status, service 
level, bed availability, medical and health resource requests) will be 
directed to theMCC. 
 
2. The Southeast District Net Control ARO will provide status reports of all 
healthcare facilities within the city to LBC’s EOC every six hours or as 
requested. 
 
3. The ARO assigned to LBC’s EOC will have the ability, independent of the 
Southeast District Net Control ARO, to contact healthcare facilities within 
the city as determined by LBC’s EOC. 
 
4. An ARO will be assigned to Long Beach Department of Health and 
Human Services as a direct link to LBC’s EOC ARO. 
 
5. The LBC Traffic Flow process may be replicated by any city EOC as 
determined by their EOC manager. 
 
E. KPARN (or other Amateur Radio Groups) 
 
1. Hospital ARO groups shall follow their established internal process for 
activation and utilization AROs. 

SUBJECT: AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATIONS REFERENCE NO. 1132 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
PAGE 5 OF 5 
 
2. If a healthcare facility within this group needs to communicate with 
theMCC, they should communicate directly to their District Net Control 
ARO assigned to theMCC. 
 
F. ARO “in-Net” communications shall be strictly related to the mission as set forth 
by the MCC or their assigned healthcare facility. AROs can engage in 
communications authorized by ARES or their hospital ARO group as needed. 
ARES or the hospital ARO group will establish guidelines for “out-of-Net” 
communications. 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Amateur Radio MCI Assessment Form 
Amateur Radio Hospital Status Assessment Form
