# cms1 206081

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(HOSPITALS) 
SUBJECT: BED AVAILABILITY REPORTING REFERENCE NO. 1122 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-08 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED:  04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE:  To provide guidelines for determining and reporting of hospital bed availability. 
 
AUTHORITY: Public Health Service Act, Section 2802(b) 
 Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (Public Law 109-417) 
 Hospital Preparedness Program Basic and Expanded Agreements 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Bed Types: 
 
• Adult Intensive Care Unit (ICU): Beds that can support critically ill/injured patients, 
including ventilatory support. 
 
• Burn or Burn ICU: Applies to designated burn centers only. These beds are either 
approved by the American Burn Association or self-designated. Note: These beds 
should be excluded from other ICU bed counts. 
 
• Medical/Surgical: Otherwise referred to as “Ward” beds. 
 
• Negative Pressure/Isolation: Beds provided with negative airflow to provide respiratory 
isolation. Note: This value may represent available beds included in the counts of other 
types. 
 
• Neonatal ICU: Beds that can support critically ill/injured neonates. A neonate is a 
newborn infant up to one month of age. 
 
• OB/Gyn: Applies to all perinatal beds, including labor and delivery beds, antepartum and 
post-partum beds. 
 
• Operating Rooms: An operating room that is equipped, staffed, and could be made 
available for patient care in a short period. 
 
• Other: Other types of beds that are available in the facility, i.e., acute rehabilitation, 
transitional care, skilled nursing. Facility will define type of bed upon data entry. 
 
• Pediatric: Medical-surgical beds for patients 17 years or younger. 
 
• Pediatric ICU: The same as adult ICU but for patients 17 years or younger. 
 
• Psychiatric: Beds in a closed/locked psychiatric unit or medical-surgical beds where a 
patient will be attended by a sitter. 
 
• Telemetry: Includes all monitored beds excluding ICU beds. These beds are capable of 
continuous cardiac monitoring. 

SUBJECT: BED AVAILABILITY REPORTING REFERENCE NO. 1122 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
• Trauma: Applies to designated Trauma Centers only. Beds that can support critically 
injured patients. Note: This value may represent available beds included in the counts of 
ICU beds. 
 
Emergency Department (ED) Status: Applies to 9-1-1 receiving hospitals only. Diversion 
status of the ED. 
 
HAvBED (Hospital Available Beds for Emergencies and Disasters): A national system for 
capturing bed availability data from divergent systems to create bed availability information 
based on standardized definitions. 
 
Mass Decontamination Facility Availability: Available chemical/biological/radiological 
multiple patient decontamination capability. 
 
Surge Capacity: The ability to quickly expand capacity and capability beyond normal 
operations to meet an increased demand for medical care in the event of a multiple casualty 
incident (MCI), bioterrorism or other large-scale public health emergencies. 
 
Vacant/Available Beds: Beds that are vacant and to which patients can be transported 
immediately. These must include supporting space, equipment, medical material, ancillary and 
support services, and staff to operate under normal circumstances. These beds are licensed, 
physically available and have staff on duty to attend to the patient who will occupy the bed. 
 
Ventilators: The number of ventilators that are present in the institution that are not currently in 
use and could be supported by currently available staff. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
I. Accurate and rapid determination of bed availability is essential for effective coordination 
of patient transport and movement during an incident. 
 
II. Hospitals using standardized definition of bed status will provide greater consistency in 
reporting bed availability information. 
 
III. Bed availability assessment should be conducted by house supervision or bed control 
staff to provide accurate bed availability count for the entire facility. 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Bed Availability Reporting 
 
A. During an exercise or an actual event, the Medical Alert Center (MAC) will send a 
message to hospitals to complete or update their bed availability data in the 
ReddiNet system. 
 
B. ED/hospital personnel responsible for monitoring the ReddiNet shall notify their 
house supervision or bed control staff to conduct a facility-wide bed availability 
assessment for each of the following type of beds and resources: 
 
1. Adult ICU 
 

SUBJECT: BED AVAILABILITY REPORTING REFERENCE NO. 1122 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
2. Medical/Surgical 
 
3. Burn 
 
4. Pediatric ICU 
 
5. Pediatric bed 
 
6. Psychiatric 
 
7. Negative pressure/Isolation 
 
8. Obstetrics/Gynecology 
 
9. Trauma 
 
10. Telemetry 
 
11. Neonatal ICU 
 
12. Operating rooms 
 
13. Other 
 
14. Number of available ventilators 
 
15. Mass decontamination availability 
 
 
C. Hospitals must complete, update, or submit their bed availability data within 60 
minutes of the request. 
 
II. Bed Availability Reporting Exercise 
 
To familiarize hospital staff with bed availability reporting procedures, the Emergency 
Medical Services (EMS) Agency will conduct regularly scheduled exercises. 
 
III. Bed Availability Data Validation 
 
A. The EMS Agency will monitor bed reporting activities and may contact any 
hospital to validate submitted information. 
 
B. A quarterly report will be sent to each hospital’s Emergency Management 
Coordinator.  
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 1122.1, Bed Availability Report
