# cms1 206363

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
EFFECTIVE: 03-31-97   Page 1 of 11 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define criteria for the approval of primary and refresher Emergency Medical 
Technician (EMT) training programs in Los Angeles County. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.109, 1797.170, 1798.208, 1798.210, 
1797.214, 1797.217, 1797.220, California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 22, 
Division 9, Chapter 2 et seq., and Section 11500 of the Government Code. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
California EMT Certifying Entity: A public safety agency or the Office of the State Fire 
Marshal, if the agency has a training program for EMT personnel that is approved pursuant to 
the standards developed pursuant to Section 1797.109 of the Health and Safety Code, or the 
medical director of a local EMS Agency. 
 
EMT: A person who has successfully completed an EMT course that meets the requirements of 
Chapter 2 of Division 9 of Title 22, has passed all required tests, and has been certified by a 
California EMT certifying entity. 
 
EMT Approving Authority: The local EMS Agency that has jurisdiction in the county where the 
training program is located or the EMS Authority for qualified statewide public safety agencies. 
 
EMT Certifying Cognitive Exam: The National Registry of EMTs Cognitive (written) 
examination used to test an individual who is applying for EMT certification. 
 
EMT Certifying Psychomotor Exam: The National Registry of EMTs Psychomotor (skills) 
examination used to test an individual who is applying for EMT certification. 
 
High Fidelity Simulation: Computerized manikins operated by a person in adjacent location to 
produce audible sounds, and to alter, simulate, and manage physiological changes within the 
manikin to include, but not limited to altering the vital signs, oxygen saturation, and lung sounds. 
 
Tamper Resistant:  A procedure or technique to prevent alteration, fraud, or forgery of a EMT 
program document designed by the EMT program. 
 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Los Angeles County approved EMT training programs shall comply with State 
regulations and EMS Agency policies. 
 
2. Only EMT training programs and locations approved by the EMS Agency may provide 
training in Los Angeles County. This applies to all phases of EMT training. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 2 of 11 
3. An approved EMT training program shall notify the EMS Agency in writing within thirty 
(30) days of any change in curriculum, hours of instruction, location changes, program 
staff, or clinical experience sites. 
 
4. All program materials specified in this policy and the program application shall be subject 
to periodic review by the EMS Agency. 
 
5. All programs shall be subject to on-site evaluations by the EMS Agency. 
 
6. All programs shall submit an annual report for the preceding fiscal year. 
 
7. All programs shall submit an annual schedule for the upcoming calendar year. 
  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Approving Authority 
 
The Los Angeles County EMS Agency is the approving authority for EMT training 
programs whose headquarters or training locations are located within Los Angeles 
County. 
 
II. Approved Training Programs  
 
A. An approved EMT training program shall prepare individuals to render 
prehospital basic life support at the scene of an emergency, during transport of 
the sick and injured, or during inter-facility transfer within an organized EMS 
system. 
 
B. EMT training shall only be offered by approved training programs. 
 
C. Eligibility for program approval shall be limited to the following institutions: 
 
1. Accredited universities and colleges, including junior and community 
colleges, school districts, and private post-secondary schools approved 
by the State of California, Department of Consumer Affairs, Bureau of 
Private Postsecondary, and Vocational Education for EMT and/or EMT 
Refresher Programs. 
 
2. Medical training units of a branch of the Armed Forces including the 
Coast Guard of the United States. 
 
3. Licensed general acute care hospitals, which hold a special permit to 
operate a Basic or Comprehensive Emergency Medical Service, and 
provide continuing education (CE) to other health care professionals. 
 
4. Agencies of government including public safety agencies. 
 
5. Local EMS agencies. 
 
III. Application 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 3 of 11 
A. Obtain an application packet from the EMS Agency. The required content that 
shall be submitted to the EMS Agency is listed in the application instructions. 
 
B. The application and required contents shall be submitted to the EMS Agency with 
a table of contents. 
 
IV. Program Requirements 
 
A. Course Prerequisites 
 
1. All candidates shall have CPR training equivalent to the current American 
Heart Association’s Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care at the Healthcare Provider level. 
 
2. All candidates shall have completed Incident Command System (ICS) 
100 and 700 training within the 1
st
 week of the program. 
 
B. Course Content 
 
1. Program hours shall be a minimum of 170 hours: 
 
a. A minimum of 146 hours of didactic instruction and skills 
laboratory. 
 
b. A minimum of 24 hours of supervised clinical experience. 
 
i. Primary training programs shall have written agreement(s) 
with one (1) or more general acute care hospital(s) and/or 
ambulance provider(s). 
 
ii. Written agreement(s) shall specify the roles and 
responsibilities of the training program and the clinical 
provider(s) for supplying the supervised clinical experience 
to include liability insurance. 
 
iii. The clinical experience shall include a minimum of ten (10) 
documented patient contacts wherein a patient 
assessment and other EMT skills are performed and 
evaluated as identified in the clinical manual. 
 
iv. Supervision for the healthcare facility clinical experience 
shall be provided by an individual who meets the 
qualifications of a principal instructor or teaching assistant. 
No more than three (3) students shall be assigned to one 
(1) qualified instructor. 
 
v. If high fidelity simulation is available, it may replace up to 
six (6) hours of supervised clinical experience and may 
replace up to three (3) documented patient contacts with 
approval of the device by the EMT Approving Authority. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 4 of 11 
c. Program hours shall not include any written, computerized, or skill 
examinations. 
 
2. Course content shall meet the objectives and requirements contained in 
the current U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) National EMS 
Education Standards, California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 2, 
the California Health and Safety Code, and Los Angeles County 
Emergency Medical Services Prehospital Care Policies. 
 
3. Skills laboratory conducted in the classroom shall be structured to ensure 
that no more than ten (10) students are assigned to one (1) principal 
instructor/teaching assistant during skills practice sessions. 
 
C. Testing Requirements 
 
1. The program shall include periodic competency based written and skills 
exams that are administered throughout the program to determine the 
level of knowledge acquired and skills competency. 
 
2. The program shall administer an approved final cognitive and 
psychomotor exam that has established passing criteria at the end of the 
program, which demonstrates successful course completion. 
 
3. Successful completion of an approved final psychomotor exam, 
administered at the end of the program, is required for a student to be 
eligible to take the National Registry of EMT (NREMT) cognitive 
examination. 
 
D. Staff Requirements 
 
Each program shall have a program director, clinical coordinator, and principal 
instructor(s) who meet all requirements of this Reference. Programs may utilize 
teaching assistants in accordance with this Reference. Nothing in this section 
precludes the same individual from being responsible for more than one (1) 
position. 
 
1. Program Director 
 
a. Shall be qualified by education and experience with at least forty 
(40) hours of documented teaching methodology instruction in 
areas related to instructional development, instructional 
methodology, materials, and evaluation of instruction.  
 
b. Duties of the program director, in coordination with the program 
clinical coordinator, shall include but not be limited to: 
 
i. Administering the training program. 
 
ii. Approving course content. 
 
iii. Approving all examinations, which includes the final 
cognitive and psychomotor examinations. 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 5 of 11 
 
iv. Coordinating all clinical and field activities related to the 
course. 
 
v. Approving the principal instructor(s) and teaching 
assistants and ensuring all licenses/certifications are 
current and valid. 
 
vi. Signing all course completion records. 
 
vii. Assuring that all aspects of the EMT training program 
comply with the California Code of Regulations and other 
related laws. 
 
viii. Assuming the role of liaison between the EMS Agency and 
the EMT program. 
 
ix. Evaluating the program on an annual basis including 
performance evaluations of staff. 
 
2. Clinical Coordinator 
 
a. Shall be a Physician, Registered Nurse, Physician Assistant, or a 
Paramedic currently licensed in California and shall have two (2) 
years of academic or clinical experience in emergency medicine 
or prehospital care in the last five (5) years. 
 
b. Duties shall include, but not be limited to: 
 
i. Responsibility for the overall quality of the medical content 
of the program.  
 
ii. Approval of the principal instructor(s) and teaching 
assistants by ensuring they meet all qualifications specified 
within California Code of Regulations.  
 
3. Principal Instructor 
 
Shall be qualified by education and experience with a minimum of forty 
(40) hours of teaching methodology instruction in areas related to 
instructional development, instructional methodology, materials, and 
evaluation of instruction and shall meet the following additional 
qualifications: 
 
a. Be a Physician, Registered Nurse, Physician Assistant, or a 
Paramedic currently licensed in California or an advanced EMT or 
EMT who is currently certified in California 
 
b. Have a minimum of two (2) years of academic or clinical 
experience in the practice of emergency medicine or prehospital 
care in the last five (5) years. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 6 of 11 
c. Be approved by the program director and the clinical coordinator 
as qualified to teach the assigned topics. 
 
4. Teaching Assistant(s) 
 
a. Shall be qualified by training and experience to assist with 
teaching course content. 
 
b. Shall be approved by the program director and the clinical 
coordinator as being qualified to assist in teaching the assigned 
topics. 
 
c. Shall be supervised by the program director, clinical coordinator, 
or a principal instructor. 
 
E. EMT Refresher Program 
 
1. An approved EMT refresher program consists of a minimum of twenty-
four (24) hours of didactic instruction. 
 
2. The minimum acceptable content is comprised of five (5) categories, plus 
four (4) hours of elective education. Each category contains the following 
minimum hourly requirements:  
 
a. Airway – 1.5 hours 
 
b. Cardiovascular – 6 hours 
 
c. Trauma – 1.5 hours 
 
d. Medical/Behavioral – 6 hours 
 
e. Operations – 5 hours 
 
f. Elective – 4 hours 
 
g. Training for Naloxone – IM, Intranasal, and Autoinjector, 
Epinephrine Autoinjector, and Glucometer must be included within 
the refresher program. 
 
3. Testing Requirements 
 
a. The program shall administer a final cognitive and psychomotor 
exam that has established passing criteria at the end of the 
program, which demonstrates successful course completion. 
 
b. The psychomotor exam shall test the fourteen (14) skills listed on 
the Skills Competency Verification form, EMSA – SCV (01/2017). 
 
4. The requirement for an EMT training program to offer refresher training 
may be waived if formally requested by the program director. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 7 of 11 
F. Challenge Program 
 
1. A course challenge program consists of cognitive and psychomotor 
examinations with pre-established passing standards offered by an 
approved EMT primary training program for a qualified individual to 
receive an EMT course completion certificate. 
 
2. Student Eligibility 
 
a. Licensed in the United States as a Physician, Registered Nurse, 
Physician Assistant, Vocational Nurse, or Practical Nurse. 
 
b. An individual who provides documented evidence of having 
successfully completed an emergency medical service training 
program of the Armed Forces of the United States within the 
preceding two (2) years that meets the U.S. DOT National EMS 
Education Standards (DOT HS 811 077A, January 2009). 
 
c. An individual who was active during the last two (2) years in a 
prehospital emergency medical classification of the Armed 
Services of the United States and has completed an approved 
twenty-four (24) hour EMT Refresher course or equivalent in EMS 
CE within the preceding two (2) years. 
 
3. A course challenge examination shall consist of a competency-based 
cognitive and psychomotor examination to test the knowledge of the 
topics and skills required in a primary EMT program. 
 
a. An eligible person shall be permitted to take the challenge 
examination only one (1) time. 
 
b. An individual who fails to achieve a passing score on the 
challenge examination shall successfully complete an EMT course 
to receive an EMT course completion record. 
 
4. The challenge program shall be submitted with all requirements and 
documents for approval and offered no less than once each time the EMT 
course is given. However, the requirement for an EMT training program to 
offer a challenge program may be waived if formally requested by the 
program director. 
 
G. Course Completion 
 
1. An approved EMT training program shall issue a tamper resistant course 
completion certificate. The document must include the following: 
 
a. Name of the individual.  
 
b. Date of course completion. 
 
c. Type of EMT course completed  
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 8 of 11 
d. Statement: “EMT Training Program Approving Authority: Los 
Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency”. 
 
e. Number of course hours. 
 
f. Signature of the program director. 
 
g. Name, address, and phone number of the training program 
location. 
 
h. Statement in a large font with bold print: “This is not an EMT 
certificate”. 
 
i. Statement: “This program includes the required training in 
Glucometer, Epinephrine, Naloxone, and four (4)hours of Basic 
Tactical Casualty Care”. 
 
j. Statement: “This certificate must be maintained by the recipient for 
a minimum of four (4)years”. 
 
k. EMT’s certification number (irefresher program only) 
 
2. The EMS Agency’s EMT Course Completion Roster shall be completed 
with the required elements and submitted to the EMS Agency within 
fifteen (15) days of course completion. 
 
H. Record Keeping 
 
Each program shall maintain the following records for four (4) years: 
 
1. All required documentation as specified in the application packet for 
program approval. 
 
2. EMT Course Completion Roster. 
 
3. Documentation of course completion certificates issued. 
 
4. Original documentation or summaries of student performance and course 
evaluations. 
 
5. Curriculum vitae or resume for all program staff with a copy of current 
licenses and certifications in their field of expertise, or evidence of 
specialized training. 
 
I. Quality Improvement 
 
1. EMT training programs approved by the EMS Agency shall develop and 
implement a Quality Improvement Program that includes methods of 
evaluation that are composed of structure, process, and outcome 
evaluations, which focus on improvement efforts to identify root causes of 
problems, intervene to reduce, or eliminate these causes, and take steps 
to correct the process, and recognize excellence in performance and 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 9 of 11 
delivery of care. Areas that require continued evaluation include 
personnel, curriculum being taught, and clinical resources. 
 
2. The program shall utilize the NREMT data for first time passing rates as 
one measure to evaluate overall program effectiveness. 
 
V. Certifying Entity Requirements 
 
A. California EMT certifying entities  shall have an approved EMT refresher program 
in order to maintain their certifying entities status. 
 
B. EMT Refresher Program Application: 
 
1. Obtain an application packet from the EMS Agency. The requirements 
are listed in the application instructions. 
 
2. The application and required contents shall be submitted to the EMS 
Agency with a table of contents. 
 
C. Refresher program requirements shall be in accordance with Sections IV D, E 1-
3, and G – I of this reference. 
 
VI. Responsibilities of the EMS Agency 
 
A. Process Applications 
 
1. Notify the program applicant in writing within ninety (90) days from the 
receipt of a complete application of the decision to approve or deny. The 
application is only considered for approval if it is complete, and all 
requirements have been met. 
 
a. Notify the program applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt of the 
application that the application was received and/or what 
information is deficient, or is missing, and the date the information 
is due. 
 
b. Failure to submit requested information within specified time frame 
after receiving written notification shall render the application null 
and void. 
 
2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the EMS Agency shall establish 
the effective date of program approval. 
 
3. Initial approval and re-approval shall be granted up to four (4) years. 
Program approval or disapproval shall be made in writing by the EMS 
Agency to the program applicant.   
 
B. Audit Programs 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall conduct a scheduled site survey prior to initial 
program approval and re-approval.  
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 10 of 11 
2. Individual classes are open for scheduled or unscheduled 
visits/educational audits by the EMS Agency.  
 
VII. EMT Training Program Disciplinary Actions 
 
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of CCR Div. 9, Ch. 2, et seq. such as 
violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting 
the violation of, or conspiring to violate any of the terms of the California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 2; the California Health and Safety Code, Division 
2.5; or Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Prehospital Care 
Policies shall result in disciplinary action. 
 
B. The requirements for training program noncompliance notification and actions 
are as follows: 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall provide notification of noncompliance to the EMT 
training program. This notification shall be in writing and sent by certified 
mail to the EMT training program director. 
 
2. Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the noncompliance notification, the 
EMT training program shall submit in writing, by certified mail, to the EMS 
Agency one (1) of the following: 
 
a. Evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, or 
 
b. A plan to comply with the provisions of this Chapter within 
sixty (60) days from receipt of the notification of noncompliance. 
 
3. Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the EMT training program’s 
response, or within thirty (30) calendar days from the mailing date of the 
noncompliance notification, if no response is received from the training 
program, the EMS Agency shall issue a decision letter by certified mail to 
the State of California EMS Authority and the training program. The letter 
shall identify the EMS Agency’s decision to take one or more of the 
following actions: 
 
a. Accept the evidence of compliance provided. 
 
b. Accept the plan for meeting compliance. 
 
c. Place the training program on probation. 
 
d. Suspend the training program. 
 
e. Revoke the training program 
 
4. The decision letter shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
 
a. The date of the EMS Agency’s decision. 
 
b. The specific provisions found to be noncompliant. 
 

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN REFERENCE NO. 906 
 TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL 
 
 Page 11 of 11 
c. The probation or suspension effective and ending date, if 
applicable. 
 
d. The terms and conditions of the probation or suspension, if 
applicable. 
 
e. The revocation effective date, if applicable. 
 
C. If the training program does not comply with subsection VII, B, 2, of this 
reference, the EMS Agency may uphold the noncompliance finding and initiate a 
probation, suspension, or revocation action as described in subsection VII, B, 3 
of this section. 
 
D. The EMS Agency shall establish the probation, suspension, or revocation 
effective dates no sooner than sixty (60) days after the date of the decision letter 
as described in subsection VII, B, 3 of this section. 
 
E. Causes for actions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
a. Failure to correct identified deficiencies within the specified length of time 
after receiving written notice from the EMS Agency. 
 
b. Misrepresentation of any fact by an EMT training program of any required 
information. 
 
F. An EMT training program is ineligible to reapply for approval following a denial or 
revocation for a minimum of 12 months. 
 
G. If an EMT training program is placed on probation, the terms of probation, shall 
be determined by the EMS Agency. During the probationary period, the EMS 
Agency must give prior approval for all EMT programs offered. Course 
documents must be submitted to the EMS Agency at least thirty (30) days prior to 
each course being offered. The EMS Agency shall provide written notification of 
program approval to the program director within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of 
the request. Renewal of the training program is contingent upon completion of 
the probationary period. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 802, EMT Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 802.1, EMT Scope of Practice – Field Reference 
Ref. No. 1014, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Certification
