# cms1 206223

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE LICENSING  
 INVESTIGATIONS  REFERENCE NO.  453 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 10-01-12       PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 07-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-15 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline a process for investigating complaints about, or violations related to, 
ambulance operations in Los Angeles County. 
 
AUTHORITY:  Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Ambulance Ordinance 
7.16.020 
Health & Safety Code 1797.170, 1797.172, 1797.204, 1797.224 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100062, 100063, 100145, 
100169 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Ambulance transport is an essential healthcare service and the public depends on the 
system’s integrity and quality when they are sick or injured. 
 
2. Any complaint, including anonymous complaints, received by the EMS Agency will be 
reviewed, and if appropriate investigated to determine if a violation has occurred. 
 
3. Investigations are initiated based on tips from citizens, EMS providers, healthcare 
facilities, etc., or they may result from direct observations or audits by an enforcement 
officer.  
 
4. All investigation documents and associated materials are confidential and cannot be 
obtained with a public record request.  The EMS Agency will make every possible effort 
to maintain the confidentiality of informants. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Initiation of an Investigation 
 
A. Any private citizen, patient, provider agency personnel, or healthcare facility 
personnel believe, who has reason to believe that inadequate services were 
provided, or that they have observed an ambulance operator commit violations of 
the Los Angeles County Code (County Code), or any other applicable federal, 
state or local rules, regulations and laws, including Los Angeles County 
prehospital care policies, may submit a request for an investigation to the EMS 
Agency as follows: 
 
1. Submit a Los Angeles County EMS Agency Situation Report (preferred 
method).  The document can be found on the EMS Agency website at 
http://file.lacounty.gov/SDSInter/dhs/207377_SituationReport.pdf
.  The 
document may be completed online and submitted, or it may be mailed to 
the EMS Agency; or 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE LICENSING 
 INVESTIGATIONS   REFERENCE NO. 453 
   
PAGE 2 OF 4 
 
2. Send an e-mail to ambulanceviolations@dhs.lacounty.gov; or 
 
3. Contact the EMS Agency, Ambulance Programs Section, at 
562.378.1500; or 
 
4. Send a letter to: 
 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
ATTN:  Ambulance Programs Section 
10100 Pioneer Blvd., Suite 200 
Santa Fe Springs, CA 90670 
 
5. The EMS Agency may notify the ambulance operator identified in the 
complaint, and if applicable provide all relevant non-confidential 
information related to the allegations received.  However, the complaint 
source will not be identified at any time during or after the investigation 
process. 
 
B. Investigations may also be initiated by a designated enforcement officer (refer to 
Reference No. 456.1, Ambulance Licensing Enforcement Officers) if they believe, 
or have reason to believe, that inadequate services were provided by an 
ambulance operator. 
 
1. If an enforcement officer observes a violation of the County Code, or 
any other applicable federal, state or local rules, regulations or laws, 
including Los Angeles County prehospital care policies, a Notice of 
Violation may be issued and further investigation is not required (Refer 
to Reference No. 451, Ambulance Licensing Notices of Violation and 
Administrative Fines). 
 
2. The Notice of violation may specify a correction period if, in the 
enforcement officer’s judgment, a correction period is warranted. 
 
C. Investigation Procedures 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall independently investigate and verify, if possible, 
the allegations described in the complaint.  Techniques and information 
sources that may be utilized as part of the investigation process include, 
but are not limited to, the following: 
 
a. EMS Agency records 
b. Patient care records 
c. Personnel interviews 
d. City and county business license records 
e. Billing records 
f. Law enforcement records 
g. Secretary of State records 
h. Internet / websites / social media 
i. Telephone directories 
j. Previous investigation records 
k. Onsite inspection and/or surveillance 
l. Other EMS providers 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE LICENSING 
 INVESTIGATIONS   REFERENCE NO. 453 
   
PAGE 3 OF 4 
 
m. Investigations from other agencies 
n. Newspaper and/or magazine articles 
 
2. Personnel interviews may be part of the investigation process when 
indicated and such interviews will be coordinated and scheduled with 
the ambulance operator associated with the complaint. 
 
3. The written complaint and all pertinent documents and information 
obtained shall be reviewed for potential violation of the County Code, or 
any other applicable federal, state or local rules, regulations or laws, 
including Los Angeles County prehospital care policies. 
 
4. EMS Agency enforcement officers and staff shall review all available 
information and prepare a confidential written report to include, but not 
limited to: 
 
a. Identification of the information sources reviewed and/or 
individuals interviewed. 
 
b. A brief description of the violation or incident and the allegations 
submitted and/or observed and a summary of the findings of the 
investigation.  Identification of the specific sections of the County 
Code or regulations violated and/or the specific prehospital care 
policy violated, if applicable, are included as part of the findings. 
 
c. Recommended actions as a result of the investigation, e.g. issue a 
Notice of Violation, personnel education, policy changes, 
corrective action plan (CAP), referral to another regulatory 
agency, etc. 
 
D. Investigation Outcomes 
 
1. If the allegations are not verified or found to be inaccurate, the 
complainant and the ambulance operator/ambulance personnel 
investigated shall be notified of the outcome and no further action is 
indicated. 
 
2. If the allegations are verified and a violation is identified as outlined in 
Reference No. 451, Ambulance Licensing Notices of Violation and 
Administrative Fines and Reference No. 451.1, Ambulance Licensing 
Administrative Fines, a Notice of Violation will be issued, and if 
applicable a Notice of Administrative Fine. 
 
3. When indicated, complaints will also be referred to other appropriate 
regulatory agencies for follow-up, e.g., other local EMS Agency, 
Medicare, law enforcement, Office of Prehospital Certification, etc. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE LICENSING 
 INVESTIGATIONS   REFERENCE NO. 453 
   
PAGE 4 OF 4 
 
Ref. No. 450,  Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses (Ambulance 
 Ordinance) 
Ref. No. 451, Ambulance Licensing Notices of Violation and Administrative Fines 
Ref. No. 451.1, Ambulance Licensing Administrative Fines 
Ref. No. 451.2, Notice of Violation – Administrative 
Ref. No. 451.3  Notice of Violation - Operational 
Ref. No. 451.4  Notice of Violation - Personnel 
Ref. No. 452,      Ambulance Licensing Administrative Fine Hearing Process
