# cms1 206205

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER (EMT/PUBLIC SAFETY) 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 08-01-88       PAGE 1 OF 6 
REVISED: 10-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-13 
 
  
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency
 
PURPOSE: To establish policies and procedures for AED service providers, EMT and Public 
Safety, in Los Angeles County. 
 
AUTHORITY:  Health and Safety Code Sections; 1797.170, 1797.190, 1797.196 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 1.5. First Aid and 
CPR Standards and Training for Public Safety Personnel 100017 100021 
100022, Chapter 2 Sections 100056,100056.1, 100063, 100063.1. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Automated External Defibrillator (AED): An external defibrillator capable of cardiac rhythm 
analysis that will charge and deliver a shock, either automatically or by user interaction, after 
electronically detecting and assessing ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia. 
 
Authorized Individual: EMT personnel employed by an EMT AED service provider who has 
met the training requirements and is authorized to use an AED. 
 
EMT (Emergency Medical Technician): An individual who is currently certified in California as 
an EMT. 
 
EMT AED Service Provider: An agency or organization approved by the EMS agency and is 
responsible for and authorizes EMTs to operate an AED for the purpose of providing services to 
the general public. 
 
Public Safety AED Service Provider: An agency or organization approved by the EMS agency 
and is responsible for and authorizes public safety personnel to operate an AED for the purpose 
of providing services to the general public. 
 
Public Safety Personnel: Firefighter, lifeguard, or peace officer (as defined by Section 830 of 
the Penal Code) not employed as an EMT. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. All AED service provider agencies shall meet State regulations and established EMS 
Agency policies. 
 
2. Only agencies or organizations that employ EMTs and/or public safety personnel are 
eligible for approval as an AED service provider. 
 
3. An approved AED service provider and their authorized personnel shall be recognized 
statewide. 
 
 
  

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
PAGE 2 OF 6 
POLICY 
 
I. Approving Authority 
 
The EMS Agency shall be the approving authority for all AED service provider programs 
whose headquarters/local operations are located within Los Angeles County. 
 
II. Program Approval 
 
The EMS Agency: 
 
A. Shall notify the applicant within fourteen (14) business days that the application 
was received and specify what information, if any, is missing or deficient. 
 
B. Shall review and approve all first aid and/or Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
(CPR)/AED training programs which are not approved by American Heart 
Association (AHA), American Red Cross (ARC), American Safety Health Institute 
(ASHI), Peace Officer’s Standards and Training (POST), or the EMS Authority. 
 
C. May conduct a site survey prior to approval. 
 
D. Shall provide written approval authorizing AED services within thirty (30) 
calendar days, when all requirements have been met. 
 
E. May revoke or suspend an AED program, prohibiting the use of AEDs, if the AED 
service provider: 
 
1. Is found to be out of compliance with applicable state regulations and/or 
EMS Agency policies, procedures, or reporting requirements. 
 
2. Fails to correct identified deficiencies within the specified length of time 
after receiving written notice from the EMS Agency. 
 
III.   Program Staff Requirements 
 
Each program shall designate a program coordinator. 
 
A. Requirements 
 
An individual designated by the fire chief, supervisor, or general manager of the 
AED service provider organization or agency. 
 
B. The duties shall include but are not limited to: 
 
1. Program management. 
 
2. Submission of required data annually via AED Annual Report. 
 
3. Ensure that a California licensed physician, physician assistant, 
registered nurse, or paramedic, who has the ability to interpret 
electrocardiogram (ECG) rhythms, will timely and competently: 
 

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
PAGE 3 OF 6 
a. Review all cases where an AED was applied. 
 
b. Maintain required data set for annual report. 
 
c. Review and summarize system performance. 
 
d. Make recommendations, as indicated, for modification of system 
design, performance protocols, or training standards designated to 
improve patient outcome. 
 
4. Comply with department and EMS Agency policies and procedures. 
 
IV. Program Requirements 
 
A. Initial Application 
 
An organization or agency employing certified EMTs and/or employing public 
safety personnel may seek approval by submitting the following: 
 
1. A complete application, Los Angeles County EMS Agency Ref. No. 412.1, 
AED Service Provider Program Application. 
 
 
2. A written request or letter of intent which includes the following: 
 
a. A statement that the organization or agency is willing to abide by 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency Ref. No. 412, AED Service 
Provider Program Requirements. 
 
b. An assurance that all AED devices in use meet current AHA 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care (ECC) guidelines. 
 
c. Report changes in key personnel or equipment to the Los Angeles 
County EMS Agency within thirty (30) days. 
 
d. Notification of discontinuance of an approved EMS AED program 
will be sent to the Los Angeles County EMS Agency within thirty 
(30) days of closure. 
 
B. Public Safety Programs Initial Training Requirements: 
 
1. CPR and First aid training not less than 21 hours.  POST-approved basic 
academy training covers this training requirement. 
 
2. AED training and orientation of authorized personnel shall include the 
following topics and skills: 
 
a. Proper use, maintenance, and periodic inspection of the AED. 
 
b. The necessity of CPR, defibrillation, advanced life support (ALS), 
and adequate airway care. 
 

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
PAGE 4 OF 6 
c. Overview of the EMS system, 9-1-1 access, interaction with EMS 
personnel, and organization’s internal response and operational 
plan. 
 
d. Assessment of an unconscious patient, to include evaluation of 
airway, breathing, and circulation to determine cardiac arrest. 
 
e. Appropriate care if rhythm analysis reports “no shock advised”. 
 
f. AED safety precautions to enable the individual to administer a 
shock without jeopardizing the safety of the patient, rescuers, or 
bystanders. 
 
g. Recognition that an electrical shock has been delivered to the 
patient and that the defibrillator is no longer charged. 
 
h. Rapid, accurate assessment of the patient post defibrillation. 
 
i. Appropriate care following defibrillation. 
 
j. Documentation and reporting requirements 
 
 
C. Public Safety Programs Skills Competency: 
 
1. Complete a retraining course in first aid, CPR, and AED use once every 
two (2) years at a minimum which consists of not less than eight (8) 
hours. 
 
OR 
 
2. Pass a competency based written and skills pretest on first aid, CPR, and 
AED use every two (2) years at a minimum with the following restrictions: 
 
a. Appropriate retraining is provided on those topics indicated 
necessary by the pretest in addition to any new developments in 
first aid, CPR, and AED use. 
 
b. Successful completion of a written test covering the topics on 
which retraining occurred. 
 
c. The hours for the retraining may be reduced to those hours 
needed to cover the topics indicated necessary by the pretest. 
 
D. EMT Programs Training and Competency Requirements: 
 
1. CPR with AED training to the level of health care provider or professional 
rescuer in accordance with current AHA ECC guidelines. 
 
2. Orientation to the use and maintenance of the EMT service provider’s 
specific AED device(s).   
 

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
PAGE 5 OF 6 
3. Instruction in documentation, internal response and operational plan, 
reporting requirements, and EMS Agency policies and procedures related 
to AED use. 
 
4. Continued competency training and documented demonstration of skills 
proficiency which shall occur, at a minimum, every two (2) years. 
 
E. Provide the following to the EMS Agency or EMS Authority upon request for each 
AED authorized user: 
 
1. If an EMT AED provider, EMT certification number with expiration date 
and issuing agency.  
 
2. Date of most recent CPR/AED training. 
 
3. Most recent AED skills competency date. 
 
F. Maintenance of Equipment/Supplies 
 
1. Have a written policy with the procedure to be used to ensure AED 
equipment is properly maintained. 
 
2. All AEDs and supplies shall be maintained and inspected after each use 
and, at a minimum, every thirty (30) days. 
 
G. Response and Operational Plan shall include the following: 
 
1. How emergency response will be activated, e.g. 9-1-1 call, internal 
number, radio, etc. 
 
2. Geographical response area, location of each AED and number of AEDs 
in service. 
 
3. Response personnel. 
 
4. Scene safety. 
 
5. Documentation post AED application. 
 
V. Program Review and Reporting 
 
A. Approved programs shall be subject to periodic on-sit  e surveys by the EMS 
Agency. 
 
B. The EMS Agency shall be notified in writing within thirty (30) days of any change 
to program coordinator, and/or changing, adding, or upgrading AEDs. 
 
C. Complete Ref. No. 412.2, AED Service Provider Annual Report and submit by 
March 31
st
 for the previous calendar year. 
 
VI. Record Keeping 
 

SUBJECT: AED SERVICE PROVIDER 
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 412 
 
PAGE 6 OF 6 
A. Each program shall maintain the following records for four (4) years which shall 
be available for review: 
 
1. All documentation required for program approval. 
 
2. Training and competency rosters. 
 
3. Instructional and testing material. 
 
4. Maintenance/inspection log sheets. 
 
5. Curriculum vitae and qualifications for the program coordinator. 
 
B. Patient care records shall be maintained in accordance with EMS Agency 
policies. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE:  
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 412.1, EMT AED Service Provider Program Application 
Ref. No. 412.2  AED Service Provider Annual Report 
Ref. No. 602, Confidentiality of Patient Information  
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 610, Retention of Prehospital Care Records 
Ref. No. 814,  Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field 
Ref. No.911, Public Safety First Aid (PSFA) and Basic Tactical Casualty Care 
(BTCC)Training Program Requirements
