# cms1 206336

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES    
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
                                                (PARAMEDIC/MICN) 
SUBJECT:     PHYSICIAN AT THE SCENE                                             REFERENCE NO. 816 
EFFECTIVE: 01-1-81                                                      PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED:     _______________________      _____________________________ 
                          Director, EMS Agency                          Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To establish guidelines for interaction between paramedics and a patient's 
personal physician, or physicians at the scene of a medical emergency who may 
not be the patient's personal physician. The guidelines set forth in this policy are 
intended for physicians at the scene who are not responding as a Provider 
Agency Medical Director. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Section 1798.6(a) provides that "authority for 
patient health care management in an emergency shall be vested in that licensed 
or certified health care professional at the scene of an emergency who is most 
medically qualified specific to the provision of rendering emergency medical care”. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Approved EMS Physician: Includes the Medical Directors of the EMS Agency, Provider Agency 
Medical Directors, Medical Directors of an approved Los Angeles based Paramedic Training 
School, Base Hospital Medical Director or EMS Fellow in a Los Angeles based fellowship 
program as approved by the Medical Director of the EMS Agency. 
 
Base Hospital Medical Director: A physician who is providing oversight for prehospital 
operations at a Base Hospital who meets the criteria outlined in Reference No. 304. 
 
EMS Fellow: A physician who is participating in an accredited postgraduate sub-specialty 
training program (i.e., EMS/Disaster/Research) following successful completion of a residency 
program in emergency medicine or fellowship in pediatric emergency medicine. 
 
Provider Agency Medical Director: A physician designated by an approved EMS Provider 
Agency to advise and coordinate the medical aspects of field care who meets the criteria outlined 
in Reference No. 411. 
 
Physician at the Scene: A licensed physician who is not otherwise designated as an Approved 
EMS Physician 
 
PRINCIPLES:  
 
1. Although the law does not preclude a physician at the scene of a medical emergency 
from rendering patient care, it does prohibit them from directing paramedic personnel in 
advanced life support procedures. Such direction must come from the base hospital 
unless direct voice communication with the base hospital cannot be established or 
maintained. Approved EMS Physicians may direct paramedics in advanced life support 
procedures at the scene of a medical emergency. 
 
2. Instructions by a private physician who is not on scene are subject to approval by the 
base hospital physician or Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) who is in direct voice 
contact with the paramedic. 

SUBJECT:      PHYSICIAN AT THE SCENE                                            REFERENCE NO. 816 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
3. An Approved EMS Physician may direct EMS personnel in lieu of base hospital contact.  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Physician Identification 
 
A. Paramedics shall obtain proper identification, consisting of a California Physicians 
and Surgeons License, and note the physician's name, license number, and 
license expiration date on the EMS Report Form.  
 
B. When a physician on scene does not have identification or is in phone contact 
 only, base hospital contact should be made to determine the extent of 
 permissible interaction between the paramedics and the physician. 
 
II. Patient Care 
 
A. Paramedics shall contact the base hospital and notify them of the presence of the 
physician on scene.  If base hospital contact cannot be established immediately, it 
shall be made as soon as possible and a full report rendered. 
 
B. When communication cannot be established or maintained, paramedics may 
assist the physician and may provide advanced life support under the direction of 
the physician provided that their instructions are consistent with local EMS Agency 
policies and procedures.   
 
C. If either the paramedics or the base hospital physician perceive any problem(s) 
with the instructions of the patient's personal physician or physician on scene, the 
base hospital physician or MICN should speak directly with this physician to clarify 
or resolve the issue.  If this direct contact is not possible, paramedics should 
follow the direction of the base hospital so that patient care is not delayed or 
compromised. 
 
D. When the physician on scene chooses to assume or retain responsibility for 
medical care, paramedics shall instruct the physician that they must take total 
responsibility for the care given.  They must also accompany the patient until the 
patient arrives at a hospital and responsibility is assumed by the receiving 
physician unless relieved of the responsibility by the base hospital. 
 
E. An Approved EMS Physician may direct clinical care at the scene independent of 
the Base Hospital. However, communication that medical care was directed by an 
Approved EMS Physician shall be documented on the EMS patient care record 
and communicated to the receiving hospital. 
 
III. Patient Destination 
 
A. Except when the physician on scene has accepted responsibility for patient care, 
patient destination shall be determined by the base hospital in accordance with 
EMS Agency policies. 
 
B. When the physician at the scene has accepted full responsibility for patient care, 
the patient may be transported to a general acute care hospital with a licensed 
basic emergency department chosen by the physician at the scene. 

SUBJECT:      PHYSICIAN AT THE SCENE                                            REFERENCE NO. 816 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
C. If the paramedic provider agency determines that such transport would 
unreasonably remove the transport unit from the area, an alternate destination 
shall be agreed upon between the physician at the scene and the base hospital 
physician. 
 
D. If the patient's condition permits, alternate transportation may be arranged. 
 
E. If the patient's condition requires immediate transport, the decision of the base 
 hospital physician or MICN shall be followed. 
 
F. An Approved EMS Physician may direct patient disposition based on all Los 
Angeles County EMS Agency policies. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
Reference No. 304, Paramedic Base Hospital Standards 
Reference No. 411, Provider Agency Medical Director 
Reference No. 502, Patient Destination 
Reference No. 514, Prehospital EMS Aircraft Operations  
Reference No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice
