# cms1 206219

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: NOTICE OF VIOLATION – REFERENCE NO. 451.4 
AMBULANCE PERSONNEL 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-12 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 04-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 08-01-12 
Original: EMS Agency 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION – AMBULANCE PERSONNEL 
 
Title 7 Business Licenses – Chapter 7.16 Ambulances       P-001 
Inspection/Incident Date: Incident Location/Address: 
 
Operator Name: CHP No. Unit No. VIN No. 
 
Operator Address: 
 
City:  Zip: 
Driver:  Home Address, City, Zip Code:  State EMT or PM# 
 
Attendant: Home Address, City, Zip Code:  State EMT or PM# 
 
Enforcement Officer: 
 
 
A NOTICE OF VIOLATION IS BEING IMPOSED ON THE AMBULANCE DRIVER /  
ATTENDANT PURSUANT TO THE FOLLOWING: 
 
 CODE SECTION AMBULANCE PERSONNEL VIOLATIONS CATEGORY I 
 
7.16.160, C 
Driver fails to carry on their person and fails to produce a current CDL, CA Ambulance Driver’s 
certificate, DL-51 and/or CA EMT certificate or CA Paramedic License and/or Los Angeles 
County Paramedic Accreditation on request of an enforcement officer 
 
7.16.160C  
Attendant fails to carry on their person and fails to produce a current CA EMT certification 
card or CA Paramedic License and/or Los Angeles County Paramedic Accreditation on request 
of an enforcement officer 
 CODE SECTION AMBULANCE PERSONNEL VIOLATIONS CATEGORY III 
 
7.16.100, 6 
Operation of an ambulance by ambulance personnel in any manner contrary to the LA 
County Ambulance Ordinance, any section of the California Vehicle Code, Titles 13 and 22 of 
the California Code of Regulations, the Federal Aviation Regulations, and the statutes, rules, 
and regulations of the Medicare and Medi-Cal programs. 
 
7.16.160,A,4 
7.16.140, B 
Title 22, §100062 
Acts as an attendant or driver without a current EMT certificate or paramedic license 
 
7.16.140, A 
7.16.160, A, 1-2 
Drives a private ambulance without valid California Driver’s License and/or California 
Ambulance Driver Certificate 
 
7.16.160, A, 3 Drives a private ambulance without a current DL-51 
Please Note:   When applicable, violations will also be referred to other appropriate regulatory agencies for follow up. 
 
Received by_______________________________________      ______________________________________________ 
  (Print name and title)    (Signature and date) 
 
A copy of this notice will be sent to the ambulance personnel’s employer.  A follow up letter with additional instructions will 
be provided.  The key contact for a Notice of Violation is Ambulance Licensing Programs, at 562-378-1500.
