# cms1 206212

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMS AIRCRAFT PROVIDER/DISPATCH  REFERENCE NO. 418.1 
 CENTER DESIGNATION 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 09-01-03        PAGE 1 of 4 
REVISED: 01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-20 
EMS AIRCRAFT PROVIDER/DISPATCH CENTER DESIGNATION 
 
 
Application* for:    primary air ambulance provider 
(check all that apply)    back-up air ambulance provider 
    primary dispatch center 
    back-up dispatch center 
 
 
Date:   __________________________________________________ 
 
 
Agency/Company Name:   ___________________________________ 
 
 
Name of Applicant/Owner/Officer:   ____________________________ 
 
 
Business Address:   ________________________________________ 
 
 ________________________________________ 
 
 
Business Phone: ________________________________________ 
 
 
Contact Person: ________________________________________ 
(Air ambulance operations) 
 
 
Contact Person Phone:   ______________________________________ 
 
 
 
Please submit a narrative description of your air ambulance/dispatch center operations. 
*Application shall be submitted on an annual basis no later than January 31. 
 
  

SUBJECT: EMS AIRCRAFT PROVIDER/DISPATCH   REFERENCE NO. 418.1 
 CENTER DESIGNATION 
 
 
PAGE 2 of 4 
EMS AIRCRAFT APPLICATION 
 
MEDICAL FLIGHT CREW 
 
• The medical flight crew will consist of two attendants, whose scope of practice authorizes them 
to function at the ALS level. 
 
• Physicians shall be licensed in the State of California and Board certified or eligible in 
emergency medicine; unless otherwise authorized by the EMS Agency Medical Director. 
 
• Registered Nurses shall be licensed in the State of California and meet the qualifications of an 
authorized registered nurse as defined in the Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2, Section 
1797.56. 
 
• Paramedics shall be licensed in the State of California and accredited in Los Angeles County. 
(Refer to Ref. No. 418, Policy Section 1 F and G) 
 
• All flight crew members shall be a current provider or instructor in the following: 
o ACLS; 
o PALS or equivalent; 
o BTLS or PHTLS or ATLS or equivalent; 
 
• All medical flight crewmembers shall complete the provider agency’s Aeromedical Orientation 
Program. 
 
• All medical flight crewmembers shall receive a minimum of eight (8) hours annually of 
continuing education (CE)/staff development specific to aeromedical transportation. 
 

SUBJECT: EMS AIRCRAFT PROVIDER/DISPATCH CENTER DESIGNATION    REFERENCE NO. 418.1 
 
 
PAGE 3 of 4 
MEDICAL FLIGHT CREW 
 
NAME 
MD, RN, or 
EMT-P 
BOARD 
CERT. EXP 
DATE¹ 
STATE 
LICENSE 
NUMBER 
ACLS EXP 
DATE 
PALS EXP 
DATE² 
BTLS, 
PHTLS, or 
ATLS EXP 
DATE³ 
AEROMEDICAL 
ORIENTATION 
DATE 
ANNUAL 
HOURS OF CE 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
¹ if physician is not Board Certified in Emergency Medicine then indicate date of Board eligibility or authorization by the EMS Agency Medical Director. 
² if medical crew member does not have PALS certification then provide evidence of equivalent curriculum.  For equivalent curriculum submit proof of attending class every two years. 
³ if medical crewmember does not have BTLS or PHTLS or ATLS certification then provide evidence of equivalent curriculum.  For equivalent curriculum submit proof of attending class 
every two years. 
 
FLIGHT CREW 
 
NAME 
FAA MEDICAL CERT. 
ISSUE EXP DATE 
FAA PILOT CERT. 
CURRENTLY HELD 
FAA PILOT RATINGS 
CURRENTLY HELD 
PILOT IN 
COMMAND (PIC) 
TOTAL HOURS 
PIC TOTAL HOURS 
LAST 12 MONTHS 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      

SUBJECT: EMS AIRCRAFT PROVIDER/DISPATCH CENTER DESIGNATION    REFERENCE NO. 418.1 
 
 
PAGE 4 of 4 
AIRCRAFT LIST 
 
YEAR / 
MAKE / 
MODEL 
MFR’S 
SERIAL 
NUMBER 
FAA 
REGISTRATION 
NUMBER 
CALL 
SIGN 
CURRENT 
BASE 
LOCATION 
PHYSICAL 
LOCATION 
DURING 
HOURS OF 
OPERATION 
HOURS OF 
OPERATION 
STRETCHER 
CAPACITY 
TOTAL 
PERSONNEL 
CAPACITY 
(EXCL. 
PILOT) 
OVER 
WATER 
CAPABILITY 
YES/NO 
NIGHT TIME 
FLIGHT 
CAPABILITY 
YES/NO 
EMS AGENCY 
DESIGNATION
