# cms1 206348

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMS PILOT AND SCIENTIFIC STUDIES REFERENCE NO. 830 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 06-01-79 PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 09-01-21 
 
APPROVED:  ________________________           ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency                  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To provide a uniform procedure for acquiring authorization to conduct a pilot or a 
scientific study to perform additional prehospital treatment procedures or 
administer additional drugs not currently scope of practice. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.221, 24170-24179.5  
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 43.3, Article 2, Section 
 100091.02 
Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, DHHS Regulations 45 CRF 
46, FDA Regulations-CRF Title 21  
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Pilot or Scientific Study:  For the purposes of this policy, a pilot or scientific study is an 
evaluation of an intervention (i.e., medication, device, protocol, or other treatment) that is 
prospectively tested in a study population. Testing may include the introduction or withholding of 
the proposed intervention. 
 
Investigator(s): The individual or team of individuals that is leading the pilot or scientific study.   
 
Institutional Review Board: The Institutional Review Board (IRB) is a committee responsible for 
reviewing and approving all human subjects research to ensure the welfare of the participants is 
protected.  
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. All pilot or scientific studies must be submitted for review and approval by the EMS 
Agency Medical Director or designee prior to implementation. 
 
2. The EMS Agency Medical Director may approve or conduct a pilot or scientific study 
evaluating the safety, feasibility, and/or efficacy of the prehospital medication, device, 
protocol, or other treatment within the local EMS system involving EMTs and/or 
paramedics. The study shall be consistent with any requirements established by the 
California EMS Authority for pilot or scientific studies conducted within the prehospital 
emergency medical care system, and, where applicable, with the California Health and 
Safety Code, Division 104, Part 5, Chapter 6, Article 5, Section 111550-111610. 
 
3. No medication, device, protocol, or other treatment that is specifically excluded by the 
California EMS Authority from use in the EMS system shall be included in a pilot or 
scientific study without the approval of the EMS Agency Medical Director and the 
California EMS Authority. 
 
4. Any pilot or scientific study using data or information under the authority of, or maintained 
and managed by, the EMS Agency must be approved by the EMS Agency Director and 
Medical Director prior to implementation.   
 

SUBJECT: EMS PILOT AND SCIENTIFIC STUDIES REFERENCE NO. 830 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
5. When applicable, IRB approval will be required prior to implementation of a pilot or 
scientific study at the discretion of the EMS Agency Medical Director. 
 
6. Requests for implementation of procedures and/or medications currently approved for 
local additional scope or optional use within Los Angeles County are not subject to this 
policy. Such requests will be processed as identified per Los Angeles County Scope of 
Practice policies (Ref. No. 802 and 803) and applicable approved unit inventory policies. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. An investigator shall include the following information in a pilot or scientific study proposal 
submitted to the EMS Agency Medical Director: 
 
A. Background material on the proposed intervention (i.e., relevant studies or other 
medical literature).  
 
B. Statement of the pilot or study objective(s).  
 
C. Proposed timeline and duration for the pilot or scientific study. 
 
D. Description of the proposed intervention including medical conditions for which it 
will be used and the patient population that may benefit. 
 
E. Description of the proposed pilot or scientific study design and the method for 
evaluating the effectiveness and the safety of the intervention. 
 
F. Description of the data collection process. 
 
G. Description of specific and measurable outcome(s) to evaluate safety, feasibility, 
and/or efficacy of the intervention. 
 
H. Plan for quarterly reports that detail the descriptive characteristics and outcomes 
(safety and effectiveness) that will be collected and reported. 
 
I. Recommended policies and procedures to be instituted by the EMS Agency 
regarding the use and medical control of the intervention used, if necessary. 
 
J. A description of the training and competency testing required to implement the 
study. The pilot or scientific study should have a primary instructor who is 
knowledgeable, skilled and current in the subject matter relevant to the educational 
material for the proposed pilot or scientific study. 
 
K. Statement of costs anticipated risks and potential benefits to patient and/or EMS 
personnel. 
 
L. Statement of legal authority for the use of the proposed intervention. 
 
M. Letters from provider agencies participating in the pilot or scientific study indicating 
their willingness to participate. 
 
N. Letters from partner entities indicating willingness to participate, when applicable. 
Review by participating entities local IRB may also be required in some cases.  
 
O. IRB approval when applicable. If there is intent to publish the pilot or scientific 

SUBJECT: EMS PILOT AND SCIENTIFIC STUDIES REFERENCE NO. 830 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
study results, an approved IRB is required. In addition, an IRB may be required 
based on the proposed study design and estimated risk to the patient or EMS 
personnel.  
 
II. An investigator shall also submit a data use request if there is intent to use data that are 
maintained or managed by the EMS Agency as part of the pilot or scientific study (Refer to 
Ref. Nos. 622, 622.1 through 622.5). 
 
III. An investigator shall adhere to the following stipulations after submission: 
 
A. Allow up to 14 business days after proposal submission to receive notification from 
the EMS Agency of receipt of the proposal. 
 
B. Provide any missing required information and resubmit study proposal revisions as 
requested by the EMS Agency Medical Director. 
 
C. Allow up to 45 business days after EMS Agency receipt of a complete proposal to 
receive notification of approval or denial. Expect up to a total of 60 business days 
between complete study proposal submission and the EMS Agency 
approval/denial notification. 
 
D. Refrain from commencing any pilot or scientific study activities (including training) 
until approval has been granted by the EMS Agency. 
 
IV. An investigator shall adhere to the following requirements if pilot or scientific study 
approval is granted: 
 
A. In collaboration with the EMS Agency, notify all hospitals, EMS provider agencies, 
and appropriate private entities or political jurisdictions involved or affected by the 
study. 
 
B. Conduct training sessions for those involved in the study including all hospitals, 
EMS provider agencies, and personnel as applicable. 
 
C. Submit quarterly reports, within 30 days of the end of the quarter, to the EMS 
Agency Medical Director on the progress of the study, number of patients 
enrolled/treated, descriptive characteristics, and safety and effectiveness outcomes 
with appropriate interim analysis when applicable.  
 
D. Share pilot or scientific study reports with the Medical Advisory Council when 
requested. 
 
E. Immediately inform the EMS Agency Medical Director of any unanticipated adverse 
events or departure from the protocol, including discontinuation of the study, prior 
to its completion. 
 
F. Provide the final report to the EMS Agency at the conclusion of the study (and 
interim as determined by the EMS Agency Medical Director during the approval 
process) based on the agreed upon data analysis plan and target outcomes. 
 
V. The EMS Agency responsibilities are the following: 
 

SUBJECT: EMS PILOT AND SCIENTIFIC STUDIES REFERENCE NO. 830 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
A. Notify the study proposer within 14 business days of receiving the request for pilot 
or scientific study that it was received and if necessary, request any missing 
information. 
 
B. Involve the Medical Advisory Council; Innovation, Technology, and Advancement 
Committee (ITAC); or any other relevant Specialty Care Center Advisory 
Committee to assist with the evaluation and approval of the proposed study, if 
warranted. 
 
C. Notify the investigator within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the complete 
proposal of approval or denial of the proposed pilot or scientific study, or for the 
need for approval by the California EMS Authority. 
 
D. In cases where California EMS Authority approval is required, including for pilots or 
scientific studies where Local Optional Scope of Practice approval is required, the 
EMS Agency will work with the investigator to submit the pilot or scientific study 
proposal to the California EMS Authority for approval. Study investigators are 
responsible for preparing the necessary materials for submission to the California 
EMS Authority. The EMS Agency will further: 
 
a. Assist with submission of a request for Local Optional Scope of Practice, 
when applicable.  
 
b. Notify the investigator of approval or disapproval of the pilot or scientific 
study by the California EMS Authority. 
 
c. Submit the investigator’s written study conclusions or progress report to the 
California EMS Commission (EMSC) within 18 months of the initiation of 
the pilot or scientific study intervention. The conclusion or progress report 
should include, at a minimum, the study objective(s), number of patients 
studied, beneficial effects, adverse reactions or complications, appropriate 
statistical evaluation, and general conclusions. If the trial or scientific study 
is extended beyond the initially-approved time frame, submit a final report 
to the California EMSC. 
 
E. Discontinue a pilot or scientific study for safety or other concerns at any time at the 
EMS Agency Medical Director’s discretion. 
 
F. Provide a written conclusion based on the results of the pilot or scientific study, 
which will include one of the following: 
 
1. Implementation: Suitable for systemwide implementation as directed by the 
EMS Agency Medical Director 
 
2. Optional Use: EMS provider agencies maintain responsibility for education, 
training, and oversight of product/procedure/innovation use 
 
3. Pilot: Require that an EMS provider agency continue a specified pilot period 
and continue to submit pilot data to the EMS Agency on a quarterly basis 
 
4. Insufficient Data: There is insufficient data to support continuation of the 
study. Discontinuation of the study indefinitely. This conclusion may change 
with introduction of new/additional evidence. 

SUBJECT: EMS PILOT AND SCIENTIFIC STUDIES REFERENCE NO. 830 
 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 204, Medical Advisory Council 
Ref. No. 205, Innovation, Technology, and Advancement Committee (ITAC) 
Ref. No. 622, Release of EMS Data 
Ref. No. 622.1, Data Request and Levels of Support 
Ref. No. 622.2, Limited Data Set Information 
Ref. No. 622.3, Intended Use of Limited Data Set Information 
Ref. No. 622.4, Data Use Agreement 
Ref. No. 622.5, Confidentiality Agreement 
Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice
