# cms1 206051

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 11-15-88  PAGE 1 OF 11 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish procedures for approval of Emergency Medical Services (EMS) 
continuing education (CE) providers and requirements to maintain program 
approval. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 11, Health and 
Safety Code, Div. 2.5, Section 1797, et seq. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Approved CE Provider:  An individual or organization that has a valid California EMS Continuing 
Education Provider (CEP) number, an EMS CEP approved by another State, or a Commission on 
Accreditation for Pre-Hospital Continuing Education (CAPCE) provider number. 
 
EMS CE:  Course, class, activity, or experience designed to be educational, with learning objectives 
and performance evaluations for the purpose of providing EMS personnel with reinforcement of 
basic EMS training, as well as knowledge to enhance individual and system proficiency in the 
practice of EMS medical care. 
 
Instructor Based CE:  An instructor is readily available to the student during the educational time 
to answers questions, provide feedback, clarification, and address concerns. The EMS Agency 
shall determine if a CE activity is instructor based. 
 
Non-instructor Based CE:  Learning situations where an instructor does not facilitate the 
instruction process. This includes such activities as media/serial production, teaching, and 
precepting. 
 
Internet Based CE Program:  Distance learning programs designed to provide continuing 
education courses utilizing  Internet-based platforms. 
 
Intranet Based CE Program:  Distance learning programs designed to provide continuing 
education programs utilizing a privately maintained network within an organization that can be 
accessed only by authorized persons within that organization. 
 
Tamper Resistant:  A procedure or technique to prevent alteration, fraud or forgery of a CE 
document designed by the CE provider. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. EMS CE may be achieved by a variety of structured learning experiences that are relevant 
to the medical scope of practice for EMS personnel. 
 
2. EMS CE must be current and designed to enhance the scientific knowledge of direct patient 
care, develop, and maintain technical skills, and keep abreast of changes in medical 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 11 
practice and technology. 
 
3. The information presented and skills performed must be related to the medical practice of 
emergency care to meet the requirements for renewal of an EMS healthcare professional’s 
certificate or license. 
 
4. Clinical Director(s) and Instructors must have adequate training, credentials, and/or 
experience in educational content and methodology to ensure that courses adequately 
address the educational needs of EMS personnel. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. CE PROVIDER APPROVAL 
 
The EMS Agency has the primary responsibility for approving and monitoring the 
performance of EMS CE providers in Los Angeles County (LAC) to ensure compliance with 
local policies, state regulations, and guidelines. 
 
A. CE Provider Approval Process: 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall be the approving agency for CE providers whose 
headquarters are located within LAC. 
 
2. If a CE provider from another county relocates its headquarters to LAC, the 
LAC EMS Agency shall assume jurisdictional authority and the CE provider 
shall be required to relinquish prior approval and apply for LAC CE provider 
approval. 
 
3. If a CE provider relocates its headquarters to another jurisdiction, the local 
EMS Agency of that county shall assume jurisdictional authority and may 
require the CE provider to relinquish LAC approval and apply for local CE 
provider approval. 
 
4. The California EMS Authority shall be the approving agency for CE providers 
whose headquarters are out of state and for statewide public safety agencies. 
 
5. Program approval shall be granted up to four (4) years from the last day of 
the month in which the application is approved. This approval is not 
transferable from person to person or organization to organization. 
 
B. CE Provider Application Process: 
 
1. Interested organizations or individuals shall obtain a CE program  application 
packet from the EMS Agency website. 
 
2. Any individual or organization, public or private, interested in providing 
approved CE for EMS personnel shall submit a complete CE application 
packet. CE courses shall not be advertised or offered until approval has been 
granted. 
 
3. The CE Provider application packet shall contain: 
 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 11 
a. A complete and signed EMS CE Provider application. 
 
b. A memo on program letterhead, signed by the program director, 
requesting approval or re-approval of the EMS CE program. 
 
c. Curriculum vitae or resume, copies of applicable licenses and 
certifications, and signed program staff forms for the program director 
and clinical director. 
 
d. A complete self-developed course including a lesson plan to include 
title of the course, goal, instructional objectives (minimum of two (2) 
per course), lesson, CE hours awarded, references, resources 
(materials/equipment), handouts, method of performance evaluation 
with passing criteria, answer key, and instructor/course evaluations. 
 
e. The program’s quality improvement (QI) evaluation methodology and 
educational needs assessment to include supporting documents. 
 
f. A copy of the EMS CE advertisement/schedule. 
 
g. A copy of the EMS CE attendance record or description of on-line 
registration process. 
 
h. A copy of the EMS CE Course Completion Certificate. 
 
i. A memo on program letterhead, signed by the program director 
identifying the CE program procedure for the tamper resistant 
method(s) used, duplicate certificate issuance, and electronic tracking 
mechanism (if utilized) with certificate issuance when employment is 
terminated. 
 
4. The EMS Agency shall notify the applicant within fourteen (14) days that the 
application was received and specify missing information, if any. Failure to 
submit missing information within thirty (30) calendar days shall require the 
applicant to resubmit an original application packet for CE provider approval. 
 
5. The EMS Agency shall notify the applicant in writing within sixty (60) days 
from the receipt of a complete application of the decision to approve or deny. 
The application is only considered for approval if it is complete, and all 
requirements are met. 
 
6. The EMS Agency may deny an application for cause as specified in 
subsection I.C.2. 
 
7. The EMS Agency shall issue a “California EMS CE Provider Number” to 
approved applicants. 
 
8. Approved CE providers shall offer a minimum of twelve (12) course hours of 
CE annually. 
 
C. Denial/Revocation/Probation of CE Provider Status 
 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 11 
1. The EMS Agency may, for cause: 
 
a. Deny any CE provider application. 
 
b. Revoke CE provider approval. 
 
c. Place CE provider on probation. 
 
2. Causes for these actions include, but are not limited to the following: 
 
a. Violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in 
or abetting the violation of, or conspiring to violate any of the terms of 
the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 11; the California 
Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5; or LAC EMS Prehospital Care 
Policies. 
 
b. Failure to correct identified deficiencies within the specified length of 
time after receiving written notices from the EMS Agency. 
 
c. Misrepresentation of any fact by a CE provider or applicant of any 
required information. 
 
3. The EMS Agency may take disciplinary action(s) on an EMS CE program if 
the EMS Agency has determined that probation, denial, or revocation is 
warranted. If this occurs, the proceedings shall adhere to the California 
Administrative Procedure Act, Chapter 5, commencing with Government 
Code section 11500. 
 
4. If CE provider approval is denied or revoked, CE credit issued after the date 
of action shall be invalid. 
 
5. A provider is ineligible to reapply for approval following a denial or revocation 
for a minimum of 12 months. 
 
6. If a CE provider is placed on probation, the terms of probation shall be 
determined by the EMS Agency. During the probationary period, prior 
approval of all courses offered must be obtained. Course documents must be 
submitted to the EMS Agency at least thirty (30) days prior to each course 
being offered. Written notification of course approval shall be sent to the CE 
provider within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the request. Renewal of CE 
program approval is contingent upon completion of the probationary period. 
 
D. Relinquish Program Requirements 
 
A program electing to relinquish their EMS CE Program shall be subject to site audit 
to evaluate compliance with the requirements of this policy. A program which does 
not allow a site audit to be performed and/or meet the requirements shall be revoked. 
Program staff and program entity shall not be eligible to reapply for an EMS CE 
program for a minimum of 12 months following closure date. 
 
E. Notification 
 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 11 
The EMS Agency shall notify the California EMS Authority of each CE provider 
approved, denied, or revoked within their jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of action. 
 
II. CE PROVIDER RENEWAL 
 
A. CE Programs shall be renewed if the provider applies for renewal and demonstrates 
compliance with the requirements of this policy. 
 
B. The CE provider must submit a complete application packet for renewal at least sixty 
(60) calendar days prior to the expiration date in order to maintain continuous 
provider approval. 
 
III. CE PROVIDER REQUIREMENTS 
 
A. Approved CE providers shall ensure that: 
 
1. The content of all CE is relevant, enhances the practice of prehospital 
emergency medical care, and is related to the knowledge base or technical 
skills required for the practice of EMS. 
 
2. All records are maintained as required. 
 
3. The EMS Agency is notified within thirty (30) calendar days of any request for 
change in the CE provider name, address, telephone number, program 
director or clinical director by submitting the required documents for approval. 
 
4. All records are available to the EMS Agency upon request. 
 
5. The program is compliant with all policies and procedures regarding EMS CE. 
 
B. A CE provider may be subject to scheduled site visits by the EMS Agency for 
program audits. 
 
C. Individual classes/courses are open for scheduled or unscheduled visits/educational 
audits by the EMS Agency and/or the local EMS Agency in whose jurisdiction the 
course is conducted. 
 
D. Internet/Intranet CE: 
 
1. CE providers that offer internet-based CE must provide the EMS Agency 
with appropriate passwords or other techniques to freely access the web 
site and CE material for auditing purposes. 
 
2. CE providers that utilize an intranet-based CE program shall provide the 
EMS Agency access to course materials during a site audit or hard copies 
when requested. 
 
IV. CE PROGRAM STAFF REQUIREMENTS 
 
Each CE provider shall designate a program director, clinical director, and instructor(s) who 
meet the requirements. Nothing in this section precludes the same individual from being 
responsible for more than one function. 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 6 OF 11 
 
A. Program Director 
 
Each CE provider shall have an approved program director who is an employee of 
the organization who shall provide administrative direction and is qualified by 
education and experience in instructional development, instructional methodology, 
materials, and evaluation of instruction. 
 
1. Program director’s qualifications by education and experience shall be 
documented by a minimum of 40 hours of training in teaching methodology 
such as: 
 
a. Four (4) semester units of upper division credit in educational 
materials, methods, and curriculum development or equivalent; OR 
 
b. California State Fire Marshall (CSFM) “Instructor I and II”; OR 
 
c. National Fire Academy’s (NFA) “Fire Service Instructional 
Methodology Course” or equivalent; OR 
 
d. National Association of EMS Educators (NAEMSE) “Level I Instructor 
Course”. 
 
NOTE: New program requests shall meet the program director 
requirement upon submission of application for approval. Current 
programs may receive provisional status up to one year to meet this 
requirement with approval for change in personnel. 
 
2. The duties of the program director shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Administering the CE program and ensuring adherence to state 
regulations, guidelines, and established EMS Agency policies. 
 
b. Submitting and receiving all correspondence to and from the EMS 
Agency regarding the EMS CE Program. 
 
c. Approving course content and instructional objectives. 
 
d. Assigning course hours and professional categories. 
 
e. Approving all methods of evaluation. 
 
f. Maintaining all records. 
 
g. Coordinating or delegating coordination to the clinical director for 
clinical and field activities approved for CE credit. 
 
h. Approving instructor(s) in conjunction with the clinical director. 
 
i. Signing all rosters and course completion certificates and maintaining 
those records in a manner consistent with this policy. Signing course 
completion certificates may be delegated to the clinical director or a 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 7 OF 11 
designated instructor by submitting a formal request identifying the 
individuals for approval to the EMS Agency. 
 
j. Attending the mandatory EMS Agency Orientation Program within six 
(6) months of approval as the program director. 
 
k. Attending all mandatory CE program updates. 
 
B. Clinical Director 
 
Each CE provider shall have an approved clinical director who is an employee of or 
who is contracted with the organization to monitor the overall quality of the EMS 
content of the program. 
 
1. Clinical director qualifications shall be based on the following: 
 
a. Currently licensed and in good standing in the State of California as a 
physician, registered nurse, physician assistant, or paramedic. 
 
b. Minimum of two (2) years academic, administrative, or clinical 
experience in emergency medicine or prehospital care within the last 
five (5) years. 
 
2. The duties of the clinical director shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Monitoring all clinical and field activities approved for CE credit. 
 
b. Approving the instructor(s) in conjunction with the program director. 
 
c. Monitoring the overall EMS content of the program. 
 
d. Attending all mandatory CE program updates. 
 
C. Instructor 
 
Each CE provider instructor shall be approved by the program director and clinical 
director as qualified to teach the topics assigned. 
 
1. Instructor qualifications shall be based on one of the following: 
 
a. Currently licensed or certified in their area of expertise, OR 
 
b. Have evidence of specialized training which may include, but is not 
limited to, a certificate of training or advanced education in a given 
subject area, OR 
 
c. Have at least one (1) year of experience, within the last two (2) years, 
in the specialized area in which they are teaching, OR 
 
d. Be knowledgeable, skilled, and current in the subject matter of the 
course or activity. 
 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 8 OF 11 
 
 
V. CE HOURS 
 
The CE program director shall assign the CE hours for each course on the following basis: 
 
A. One (1) CE hour is awarded for every fifty (50) minutes of approved content. In 
cases of media or internet-based CE, it is the responsibility of the CE provider to 
document the methodology that was used to relate the awarded CE hours to the 
material presented. This methodology shall be available for audit by the EMS 
Agency. 
 
B. Courses or activities less than one (1) CE hour shall not be approved. 
 
C. Courses greater than one (1) CE hour may be granted credit in no less than thirty 
(30) minute increments. 
 
D. Each hour of structured clinical experience shall be accepted as one (1) CE hour. 
 
E. College credit applied towards meeting EMS CE requirements must be pertinent to 
emergency medical care and approved by the CE Program Director. Credit shall be 
given on the following basis: 
 
1. One academic quarter unit shall equal ten (10) CE hours. 
 
2. One academic semester unit shall equal fifteen (15) CE hours. 
 
VI. APPROVED COURSES 
 
A. All EMS CE must be relevant to and enhance the practice of emergency medical 
care. Courses directly related to patient care must be structured with learning 
objectives and incorporate a course evaluation that indicates that learning has 
occurred. 
 
B. The presentation must be delivered at a level appropriate for the target audience. 
Consideration should be given to the specific educational needs and scope of 
practice of prehospital care personnel. 
 
C. Individual courses or seminars do not require approval by the EMS Agency, and may 
be co-sponsored by a CE provider (Section VII). 
 
D. The CE provider shall issue certificates of completion to all attendees who fulfill the 
credit requirements. It is up to the CE recipient to determine if each CE hour 
awarded is appropriate for their  license/certification renewal. 
 
E. All CE activity is not of equal value for purposes of recertification. Refer to policies 
related to Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) and Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT) recertification for specific limitations. 
 
VII. CO-SPONSORING A COURSE 
 
When two or more CE providers co-sponsor a course, only one approved provider number 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 9 OF 11 
shall be used for that course, and that CE provider assumes the responsibility for all 
requirements. 
 
VIII. SPONSORSHIP OF A ONE-TIME COURSE OR ACTIVITY 
 
A. An approved CE provider may sponsor an organization or individual that wants to 
provide a single activity or course. The CE provider shall be responsible for ensuring 
the course meets all requirements and shall serve as the CE provider of record. The 
CE provider shall review the request to ensure that the course or activity complies 
with the minimum requirements. 
 
B. Whenever continuing education hours are awarded the program director shall be 
responsible for retaining all required records. 
 
IX. ADVERTISEMENTS AND TRAINING SCHEDULES 
 
A. Copies of all advertisements or training schedules shall be sent to the LAC EMS 
Agency and the local EMS Agency in whose jurisdiction the course is presented a 
minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the beginning of the course. 
 
1. Changes or cancellations shall be submitted as soon as possible. 
 
2. Additional courses may be offered with less than a fourteen (14) day notice 
due to specific needs of the organization, provided last minute education is 
not routine. 
 
B. In cases of internet-based CE, the provider shall notify the EMS Agency within 14 
working days prior to making a new lesson available or discontinuing a lesson from 
the CE site. Dates for lessons available for CE must be noted on the CE Annual 
Summary record. 
 
C. Advertisements and departmental schedules announcing CE courses must contain 
all the elements set forth in the LAC EMS Continuing Education Program Approvals 
section of the EMS Agency website. 
 
X. EMS CE ATTENDANCE RECORD AND ANNUAL SUMMARY RECORD 
 
A. An EMS CE Attendance record must be completed for all CE provided. Each student 
must sign the attendance record or register online with all data fields completed to 
receive CE credit. 
 
B. The information on the EMS CE Attendance Record must contain all the elements 
set forth in the LAC EMS Continuing Education Program Approvals section of the 
EMS Agency website. 
 
C. EMS CE attendees shall sign in or register only for themselves. Signing for another 
individual is strictly prohibited and subject to certification or licensure action. 
 
D. The original EMS CE Attendance Record shall be maintained by the CE provider. A 
legible copy (unless the original is requested) of the attendance records shall be 
submitted to the Office of Certification/Program Approvals upon request by the EMS 
Agency for the following: 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 10 OF 11 
 
1. Any County mandated program. 
 
2. Any EMS CE Attendance Record requested by the EMS Agency. 
 
E. All CE providers shall provide an annual CE summary of all courses which EMS CE 
was issued no later than January 31
st
 of the following year. 
 
XI. COURSE COMPLETION CERTIFICATES AND DOCUMENTS 
 
A. Providers shall issue a tamper resistant document (method determined by the CE 
provider) as proof of successful completion of a course within thirty (30) calendar 
days. 
 
1. A CE provider may track completion of a CE event for employees 
electronically but must still record EMS CE issued on the course roster. 
However, when requested, or upon termination of employment, the provider 
must be able to produce a course completion certificate for the employee. 
 
2. Any individual who attends a CE event who is not an employee of the CE 
provider must be issued a certificate or document as proof of completion 
within thirty (30) days. 
 
B. Any form, certificate or documentation of successful completion must contain all the 
elements set forth in the LAC EMS CE Program CE Program Approvals section of the 
EMS Agency website. 
 
XII. RECORD KEEPING 
 
Each CE provider shall maintain the following records on file: 
 
A. Complete lesson plans with outline and lesson for each course awarded CE hours as 
identified on the program review tool on the EMS Agency Program Approvals section 
of the website to include: 
 
1. Course title. 
 
2. Description of course/goal. 
 
3. Instructional objectives. 
 
4. Educational focus for course and field care audits. This may be incorporated 
in the course objectives or course description. 
 
5. Hours of instructor-based, or non-instructor based continuing education. 
 
6. Handouts. 
 
7. References. 
 
8. Resources (materials/equipment needed). 
 

SUBJECT: EMS CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) PROVIDER 
 APPROVAL AND PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 1013 
 
 
PAGE 11 OF 11 
B. Method of performance evaluation (e.g., post-test with answer key and passing 
criteria, skills assessment tool, or other measurement tool). 
 
C. Advertisement and/or course schedule. 
 
D. Agenda, if more than one (1) topic and/or more than a four (4) hour course. 
 
E. EMS CE Attendance Record. 
 
F. A curriculum vitae or resume from the instructor providing the CE course instruction, 
class or activity, and verification that the instructor is qualified to teach the topics 
assigned, or have evidence of specialized training which may include, but is not 
limited to, a certificate of training or an advanced degree in a given subject, or have 
at least one year of experience within the last two years in the specialized area in 
which they are teaching, or be knowledgeable, skillful, and current in the subject 
matter of the course, class or activity. 
 
G. Original or summary of performance evaluations administered. 
 
H. Original or summary of course evaluations. 
 
I. Documentation of course completion certificates issued, or e-tracking documented. 
 
J. All records shall be maintained for four (4) years. 
 
K. All records must be available when audits are conducted. 
 
L. Result of the education quality improvement plan and the needs assessment. 
 
XIII. FEES 
 
Pay the established CE provider fee at the time of application for approval or re-approval. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 621, Notification of Personnel Change 
Ref. No. 621.1, Notification of Personnel Change Form 
Ref. No. 1006, Paramedic Accreditation 
Ref. No. 1010, Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) Certification 
Ref. No. 1014, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Certification 
 
 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency, Continuing Education Program Application Packet
