# cms1 206073

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: MOBILIZATION OF LOCAL PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE NO. 1106 
 CACHES (LPCs)  
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-15-06  PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-23 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the release of Local Pharmaceutical Cache (LPC) to 
designated personnel during times of medical need. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1.  The County of Los Angeles has established and funded Disaster Resource Centers to 
maintain twelve (12) Adult LPC’s (1106.1) and one (1) Pediatric LPC (1106.2) that are 
stored at various locations throughout the County. 
 
2. The authority to deploy LPCs or portions of their contents to the field, local hospitals, 
and/or dispensing sites rests with the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. In a major incident which results in a need for additional pharmaceuticals, or the need to 
begin mass prophylaxis due to exposure to a biological agent, EMS/hospital/healthcare 
facility personnel shall request for the deployment of the LPC by contacting the EMS 
Agency via the Medical Alert Center (MAC), ReddiNet, VMED28 Radio:155.34mhz, or 
telephone at (866) 940-4401. 
 
If EMS personnel are unable to contact the MAC, contact the Fire Operational Area 
Coordinator (FOAC) – Los Angeles County Fire District (which is contacted through its 
Dispatch Center). 
 
See Ref. No. 1108, CHEMPACK Deployment for Nerve Agent Release. 
 
II. Once approved for deployment, the following will occur:  
 
A. EMS Agency shall:  
 
1. Contact the LPC storage facility to inform them of the need to release the 
cache 
 
2. Identify they are from the EMS Agency and provide their name, employee 
number, and a phone number where they can be contacted; 
 
3. Provide the name of the person(s) who will be picking up the LPC; and 
 
4. Provide an estimated time of arrival.  

SUBJECT: MOBILIZATION OF LOCAL PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE NO. 1106 
 CACHES (LPCs)  
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
B. DRC shall:  
 
1. Arrange for time of pick-up; and  
 
2. Provide instructions on pick-up location; and  
 
3. Provide DRC POC name and phone number 
 
C. Recipient shall:  
 
1. Contact the designated facility personnel; 
 
2. Be provided access to the LPC; 
 
3. Provide facility or government issued photo identification with their name to 
the storage facility personnel; and 
 
4. Sign the required form(s), Ref. No. 1106.1 or 1106.2, LPC Inventory and 
Checklist for Items Deployed acknowledging the receipt of the LPC. 
 
III. The LPC may be delivered directly to the field, to a hospital, or to a staging site. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 1106.1, Adult LPC Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed 
Ref. No. 1106.2, Pediatric LPC Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed  
Ref. No. 1106.3, LPC Photograph 
Ref. No. 1108, CHEMPACK Deployment for Nerve Agent Release
