# cms1 206320

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: CALIFORNIA POISON CONTROL SYSTEM REFERENCE NO. 805 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-97 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To ensure that provider agencies and base hospitals have access to the 
California Poison Control System (CPCS) and have a mechanism in place for 
quality improvement and problem resolution. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 9, Articles 1 and 2. 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Poison Control Center: A facility designated by the State Emergency Medical Services 
Authority (EMSA) that provides information and advice to the public and health professionals 
regarding the management of individuals who have or may have ingested, inhaled or otherwise 
been exposed to poisonous or possibly toxic substances. 
 
 
CALL THE CALIFORNIA POISON CONTROL SYSTEM TOLL FREE AT: 1-800-222-1222 or 
access the website at www.calpoison.org 
 
This number may be accessed by health professionals, 9-1-1 providers, and the public 24 
hours/day, 7 days/week and 365 days/year. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Provider Agency Dispatch Centers may: 
 
A. Contact the CPCS to access information and advice regarding the management 
of individuals who have, or may have, ingested or otherwise been exposed to 
poisonous or possibly toxic substances. 
 
B. Elect to establish three-way communication between the CPCS, the Dispatch 
Center and the 9-1-1 caller. 
 
C. Utilize information provided by CPCS to determine whether a 9-1-1 response is 
indicated and, if so what level, and/or to provide pre-arrival instructions to the 
caller. 
 
D. Relay information to field personnel. 
 
II. Paramedics shall contact the assigned base hospital for information and advice 
regarding the management of individuals who have, or may have, ingested or otherwise 
been exposed to poisonous or possibly toxic substances. 
 
III. Base Hospitals may contact the CPCS to access information and advice regarding the 
management of individuals who have, or may have, ingested or otherwise been exposed 

SUBJECT: CALIFORNIA POISON CONTROL SYSTEM  REFERENCE NO. 805 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
to poisonous or possibly toxic substances when the base has been contacted by 
prehospital personnel. 
 
IV. Quality Improvement/Problem Resolution – Questions or concerns related to the CPCS 
should be referred to the Los Angeles County EMS Agency for follow-up.
