# cms1 206202

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES   
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  
   
SUBJECT:     9-1-1 PROVIDER AGENCY MEDICAL DIRECTOR         REFERENCE NO. 411 
 
 
EFFECTIVE:  02-01-1994  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED:  07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES:  04-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED:  __________________________   __________________________ 
                        Director, EMS Agency                               Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To describe the role and responsibilities of Medical Directors of approved 9-1-1 
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Provider Agencies. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, 1791.90 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Board Certified (BC): Successful completion of the evaluation process through the American 
Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) or American Osteopathic Association (AOA) including an 
examination designed to assess the knowledge, skills and experience necessary to provide 
quality patient care in a particular specialty.  
 
Board Eligible (BE): Successful completion of a residency training program with progression to 
board certification based on the timeframe as specified by the ABMS or AOA. 
 
Provider Agency Medical Director:  A physician designated by an approved 9-1-1 EMS 
Provider Agency and approved by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency Medical Director, to 
provide advice and coordinate the medical aspects of field care, to provide oversight of all 
medications utilized by EMTs, paramedics, and advanced practice providers, if applicable, 
including controlled medications, and to oversee the provider’s quality improvement process, as 
defined by the Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
           
PRINCIPLE:  
 
Medical Directors enhance the quality of prehospital care by providing medical expertise in EMS 
and serve as a liaison between the EMS Agency Medical Director, hospitals, and other Private 
Ambulance Operator and Public Provider Medical Directors to ensure the delivery of safe and 
effective medical care.  
 
POLICY 
 
I. 9-1-1 Provider Agency Medical Director 
 
A. Qualifications 
 
1. BC or BE in Emergency Medical Services (EMS) or Emergency Medicine  (EM), 
with proof of significant experience and practice in EMS. 
 
2. Current, unrestricted license to practice as a physician in the State of California 
 
3. Engaged in the practice, supervision, or teaching of EM and/or EMS. 
 
4. Knowledgeable on the current policies, procedures, and protocols of the Los 
Angeles County EMS Agency. 
 

    
SUBJECT: 9-1-1 PROVIDER AGENCY MEDICAL DIRECTOR         REFERENCE NO. 411 
 
           PAGE 2 OF 4 
 
B. Responsibilities 
 
1. Represents the medical needs of his/her 9-1-1 patients by describing EMS 
activity and advocating for optimal medical care and public health measures with 
policy decision makers within the jurisdiction of their provider agencies, in 
coordination with their chain of command. 
 
2. Attend an EMS system orientation provided by the EMS Agency within six (6) 
months of hire. 
 
3. Participate in a field care observation (ride-along) with the sponsoring agency 
within six (6) months of hire. 
 
4. Attend the annual program review or participate in the exit summary. 
 
5. Attends at least 50% of the Medical Advisory Council meetings.  For meetings in 
which the medical director is unable to be present, designates a representative to 
attend for the purpose of receiving information. 
 
6. Medical Direction and Supervision of Patient Care 
 
a. Advises the provider agency in planning and evaluating the delivery of 
prehospital medical care by EMTs and paramedics. 
 
b. Reviews and approves the medical content of all EMS training performed by 
the provider agency and ensures compliance with continuing education 
requirements of the State and local EMS Agency. 
 
c. Reviews and approves the medical components of the provider agency’s 
dispatch system. 
 
d. Assists in the development of policies and procedures to optimize patient 
care. 
 
e. Reviews and recommends to the Innovation. Technology and Advancement 
Committee (ITAC) any new medical monitoring devices under consideration 
and ensures compliance with State and local regulation. 
 
f. Evaluates compliance with the legal documentation requirements of patient 
care. 
 
g. Participates in direct observation of field responses as needed.  Medical 
direction during a direct field observation may be provided by the Provider 
Agency Medical Director in lieu of the base hospital under the following 
conditions:   
 
i. The EMTs, paramedics, advanced practice providers, if applicable, and 
Provider Agency Medical Director on scene must be currently employed 
by, or contracted with, the same provider agency. 
 

    
SUBJECT: 9-1-1 PROVIDER AGENCY MEDICAL DIRECTOR         REFERENCE NO. 411 
 
           PAGE 3 OF 4 
 
ii. If base contact has already been established, the Provider Agency 
Medical Director may assume medical direction of patient care. The base 
hospital shall be informed that the Provider Agency Medical Director is on 
scene. They are not required to accompany the patient to the hospital. 
 
iii. EMS personnel shall document the involvement of the Provider Agency 
Medical Director on the EMS Report Form when orders are given. 
 
iv. The receiving hospital shall be notified of all patients whose field care is 
directed by a Provider Agency Medical Director.   
 
h. Participates as needed with appropriate EMS committees and the local 
medical community.  
 
i. Ensures provider agency compliance with Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
controlled substance policies and procedures. 
 
6. Audit and Evaluation of Patient Care 
 
a. Assist the provider agency in the development and implementation of a 
continuous quality improvement program to ensure the provision of quality 
medical care.  Provides recommendations for training and operational 
changes based on quality improvement results. 
 
b. Evaluates the adherence of provider agency medical personnel to medical 
policies, procedures and protocols of the Los Angeles County  EMS Agency. 
 
c. Coordinates delivery and evaluation of patient care with base and receiving 
hospitals. 
 
7. Investigation of Medical Care Issues 
 
a. Reviews incidents with unusual or adverse patient outcomes, inadequate 
performance of EMS personnel, and complaints related to the delivery of 
medical care. 
 
b. Evaluates medical performance, gathers appropriate facts and, as needed, 
forwards those facts in writing to the Los Angeles County EMS Agency 
Medical Director. 
 
c. Ensures that appropriate actions (e.g., training, counseling, etc.) are taken on 
cases with patient care issues with adverse outcomes, near misses, etc.  
 
II. Role and Responsibilities of the EMS Provider Agency  
 
A. Designates and maintains a Medical Director at all times. 
 
B. Ensures Medical Director is involved in the development and approval of all 
medically related policies, procedures, quality improvement and medical dispatch 
programs, as applicable. 
 

    
SUBJECT: 9-1-1 PROVIDER AGENCY MEDICAL DIRECTOR         REFERENCE NO. 411 
 
           PAGE 4 OF 4 
 
C. Ensure Medical Director has direct access to the department manager (e.g., Fire 
Chief) to discuss EMS performance, projects and concerns. 
 
D. Provides the EMS Agency with notification of any changes in the designated 
Medical Director as specified in Reference No. 621, Notification of Personnel 
Change. 
 
E. Immediately notify the EMS Agency in the event the Medical Director abruptly 
resigns or is otherwise unable to fulfill his/her duties and no immediate 
replacement is available. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 205, Innovation, Technology and Advancement Committee (ITAC) 
Ref. No. 214, Base Hospital and Provider Agency Reporting Responsibilities 
Ref. No. 414, Specialty Care Transport Provider 
 Ref. No. 422, Authorization for Paramedic Provider Status of a Los Angeles County  
Based Law Enforcement Agency   
Ref. No. 621, Notification of Personnel Change 
Ref. No. 621.1, Notification of Personnel Change Form Provider & Training Programs 
Ref. No. 701, Supply and Resupply of Designated EMS Provider Units/Vehicles 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS and SCT Units 
Ref. No. 816, Physician at the Scene
