# cms1 206339

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (EMS, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: ORGAN DONOR IDENTIFICATION REFERENCE NO. 819 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-93  PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 04-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED: ____________________ _________________________________ 
   Director, EMS Agency Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish procedures for emergency medical services (EMS) personnel such 
as EMTs, paramedics, firefighters or other emergency rescuers to comply with 
statutory requirements to make a reasonable search for documentation which 
identifies patients as organ/body part donors when death appears imminent. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 7, Chapter 3.5, Sections 7150.10, 
7150.15, and 7150.55 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Anatomical gift: A donation of all or part of a human body to take effect after the donor’s death 
for the purpose of transplantation, therapy, research, or education.  
 
Document of gift: A donor card, issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles, or other record 
used to make an anatomical gift. The term includes a statement recorded on the Donate Life 
California Organ and Tissue Donor Registry or another donor registry. 
 
Donor: An individual whose body or part is the subject of an anatomical gift. 
 
Imminent death: For the purposes of this policy, “imminent death” means any situation in which 
illness or injuries in the adult patient are so severe that, in the opinion of EMS personnel, death 
will occur before the patient arrives at the hospital. For purposes of this policy, this definition 
does not include conscious patients, regardless of the severity of illness/injury. 
 
Reasonable search: A brief, rapid attempt made by EMS personnel to locate the patient’s 
driver’s license or other documentation of anatomical gift intent. In no event should a search 
be conducted if the effort will deprive the patient of life-saving care or transport. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. An anatomical gift of a donor’s body or part may be made during the life of the donor by 
any of the following individuals: 
 
• The donor, if they are 18 years or older 
• The donor, if they are an emancipated minor 
• The donor, if they are between 15 and 18 years of age, only upon written consent 
of the parent of or guardian 
• An agent of the donor, provided that the power of attorney for health care or 
other record expressly permits the agent to make an anatomical gift 
 
2. The requirement to make a reasonable search for documentation that a patient is an 
organ donor or have refused to make an anatomical gift applies to EMS personnel such 
as EMTs, paramedics, firefighters, or other emergency rescuers finding the individual 

SUBJECT: ORGAN DONOR IDENTIFICATION   REFERENCE NO. 819 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
 
POLICY 
 
I. PROCEDURES: 
 
A. EMS personnel treating or transporting a patient whose death appears imminent 
shall make a reasonable search for a document of gift or other information 
identifying the individual as a donor or as an individual who made a refusal. 
 
B. If the documentation is located, EMS personnel shall report this information 
verbally to the following, as indicated: 
 
a. The base hospital, if contact is established 
 
b. The attending physician in the emergency department 
 
c. Law enforcement officer or coroner’s personnel at the scene if the patient 
has died on scene and will not be transported to the hospital 
 
C. If the patient is transported to the hospital, the person responsible for conducting 
the search shall send the document of gift or refusal to the hospital. 
 
II. DOCUMENTATION: 
 
A. In addition to the verbal reports described above, EMS personnel shall enter brief 
remarks in the “Comments” section of the Patient Care Record (e.g., “organ 
donor per driver’s license”, or “base hospital (or coroner, or law enforcement, 
etc.) advised verbally”. 
 
B. If so advised, MICNs shall make a brief note to this effect on the Base Hospital 
Form. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 814, Determination/Pronouncement of Death in the Field
