# cms1 206225

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE VEHICLE AGE LIMIT 
REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS REFERENCE NO. 455 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 09-01-10  PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 07-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-15 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To establish a procedure that defines the maximum age limit requirements for an 
ambulance vehicle to be licensed for operation in Los Angeles County and be 
granted an exemption beyond the defined age limit.  
 
AUTHORITY:  Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses Chapter 7.16 Ambulance, 
Section 7.16.210, Ambulance – Mechanical requirements. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The EMS Agency may grant or issue a vehicle license for an ambulance that is no more 
than eight-years-old as determined by the date the vehicle was first placed in service 
(“First Sold”) date, provided this date is not greater than one (1) year from the manufacture 
(“Model Year”) date listed on the vehicle registration. 
 
2. The EMS Agency Director may make individual exceptions to extend the age limit up to 
two (2) years beyond the eight-year age limitation (known as a vehicle exemption) to meet 
the needs of public convenience and necessity. 
 
3. Vehicles must meet all inspection requirements for business licensure to qualify for an 
exemption. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Basic Requirements 
 
A. The EMS Agency, Ambulance Programs Section, will not issue an initial/new 
ambulance business license to any vehicle over eight-years of age. 
 
B. An Ambulance Operator may obtain a two (2)-year extension for currently 
licensed ambulance vehicles over eight years of age. 
 
II. Procedure for Obtaining Vehicle Exemptions 
 
A. The Ambulance Operator must submit a written request for an exemption to the 
EMS Agency Director thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date in which the 
vehicle is scheduled to reach the eight-year age limit, as defined by the greater 
“Model Year,” or “First Sold” date listed on the vehicle registration.  Requests for 
multiple vehicles exemptions may be included in one letter. 
 
B. The letter requesting an exemption must include the following information for 
each vehicle: 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE VEHICLE AGE LIMIT 
 REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS REFERENCE NO. 455 
 
 
Page 2 of    2 
 
1. Identification (Unit number) 
2. “Model Year” and “Year First Sold,” whichever is greater 
3. Make, Model, and type (i.e., Ford, Leader E350) 
4. License plate number 
5. Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) 
6. Current mileage 
 
C. Copies of the following vehicle documents must be submitted with the letter 
requesting an exemption and all vehicle documents must be current at the time 
of submission to qualify for a vehicle exemption: 
 
1. Registration 
2. Weights and Measures—Certificate of Inspection 
3. California Highway Patrol (CHP) Inspection Report 
4. CHP Identification (ID) Card 
5. Insurance Identification Card, or comparable (as proof of vehicle 
insurance coverage) 
 
D. Upon receipt, the EMS Agency will review the exemption request and all 
supporting documents for compliance. 
 
E. Vehicles that meet the conditions referenced above will receive a two (2)-year 
exemption to the eight (8) year age limit.  The exemption expires 10 years from 
the date that the vehicle was first placed in service (“First Sold”) date, provided 
the date is not greater than one (1) year from the manufacture (“Model Year”) 
date listed on the vehicle registration. 
 
F. Upon exemption approval, the Ambulance Operator will receive a letter from the 
EMS Agency authorizing the vehicle(s) to operate an additional two (2) years 
beyond the 8-year age limit. 
 
G. The Ambulance Operator shall maintain a copy of the exemption letter in their 
administrative files, and in each applicable vehicle granted an exemption. 
 
H. A vehicle has “aged out” when it reaches its 10-year anniversary and is no longer 
eligible to operate in Los Angeles County.  Following this date, the Ambulance 
Operator must: 
 
1. Remove the vehicle from service in Los Angeles County. 
2. Remove the Los Angeles County issued seal from the vehicle and return 
it to the EMS Agency. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 450, Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Division 2, Chapter 
7.16 Ambulances 
Ref. No. 454, Ambulance Vehicle Color Scheme and Insignia Guidelines 
Ref. No. 710, Basic Life Support Ambulance Equipment
