# cms1 206359

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL  REFERENCE NO. 901 
 
EFFECTIVE: 10-18-88   PAGE 1 OF 15 
REVISED:  04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED: ______________________  _________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define criteria for the approval of a paramedic training program in Los 
Angeles County. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.173, 1797.185, 1797.192, 
1797.194, 1797.206, 1797.208, 1797.213, and 1798.200. 
 California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4 et seq., 
and Section 11500 of the Government Code. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
ALS Patient Contact: Student interaction with a patient and performance of one or more 
advanced life support (ALS) skills, except cardiac monitoring and basic cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR). 
 
EMS System Quality Improvement Program (EMSQIP): Methods of evaluation that are 
composed of structure, process, and outcome evaluations, which focus on improvement efforts 
to identify root causes of problems, intervene to reduce or eliminate these causes, and take 
steps to correct the process and recognize excellence in performance and delivery of care. 
 
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP): 
Programmatic postsecondary accrediting agency. 
 
Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical 
Services Professions: The recognized accreditation body for EMS education in the State is 
CAAHEP’s Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical 
Services Professions (CoAEMSP). 
 
Paramedic: A healthcare provider who has a valid California license and is educated and 
trained in all elements of prehospital ALS; whose scope of practice to provide ALS is in 
accordance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 4 of Division 9 of Title 22 of the California 
Code of Regulations. 
 
EMS Response: The physical response of an emergency medical services (EMS) provider due 
to activation of the EMS system with a request for medical evaluation. 
 
National Paramedic Curriculum: U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) / National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) National EMS Education Standards, January 2009. 
 
National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT): Organization that provides 
the cognitive (written) and psychomotor (skills) licensure examination for paramedics in 
California. 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 2 OF 15 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The purpose of a paramedic training program is to prepare individuals for licensure in 
order to render prehospital ALS at the scene of an emergency, during transport of the 
sick and injured, or during interfacility transfer within an organized EMS system. 
 
2. Los Angeles County approved paramedic training programs shall meet State regulations 
and established EMS Agency policies. 
 
3. Eligible training institutions requesting approval shall meet the standards for CAAHEP 
accreditation. 
 
4. New programs shall submit their application, fee, and self-study for accreditation to 
CoAEMSP within twelve (12) months following the start-up of classes. 
 
5. New programs shall receive and maintain CAAHEP accreditation no later than two years 
from the date of application to CoAEMSP for accreditation. 
 
6. Only paramedic training programs and locations approved by the EMS Agency may 
provide training in Los Angeles County. This applies to all phases of training. 
 
7. Approved training program shall provide clinical and internship assignments for 100% of 
their students within the required time frames. 
 
8. Approved training programs shall notify the EMS Agency in writing, within thirty (30) 
days, of changes in curriculum, hours of instruction, program staff, and clinical and field 
internship sites. 
 
9. Approved training programs shall participate in the EMS System Quality Improvement 
Program (EMSQIP). 
 
10. Training programs may be approved as a Continuing Education (CE) provider. 
 
11. Paramedic interns shall be measured against the standard of entry level paramedics. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Approving Authority 
 
The Los Angeles County EMS Agency is the approving authority for paramedic training 
programs whose headquarters or training locations are located within Los Angeles 
County including clinical and field internship experience. 
 
II. Program Eligibility 
 
Eligibility shall be limited to the following institutions: 
 
A. Accredited universities and colleges, including junior and community colleges, 
and private post-secondary schools as approved by the State of California, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, Bureau of Private Postsecondary Education. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 3 OF 15 
B. Medical training units of a branch of the Armed Forces or Coast Guard of the 
United States. 
 
C. Licensed general acute care hospitals which meet all of the following criteria: 
 
1. Hold a special permit to operate a basic or comprehensive emergency 
medical service pursuant to the provisions of Division 5. 
 
2. Provide continuing education (CE) to other health care professionals. 
 
3. Accredited by a Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services approved 
deeming authority. 
 
D. Agencies of government. 
 
III. Application  
 
A. Eligible training institutions shall submit a written request for program approval to 
the EMS Agency Director. 
 
B. Obtain an application packet from the EMS Agency. The required content that 
should be submitted to the EMS Agency is listed in the application instructions. 
 
C. Current CAAHEP accredited programs shall submit the following: 
 
1. All documents submitted to and received from CoAEMSP and CAAHEP 
to include, but not limited to: 
 
a. Initial approval documentation 
 
b. Self-study documents 
 
c. Documents required to maintain accreditation 
 
d. Annual report 
 
e. Copy of current accreditation certificate 
 
f. Copy of academic affiliation  
 
IV. Program Requirements 
 
A. Student Eligibility: All candidates shall: 
 
1. Possess a high school diploma or general education equivalent (GED). 
 
2. Possess a current basic cardiac life support (CPR) card for BLS Provider, 
Healthcare Provider or Professional Rescuer which meet the current 
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. 
 
3. Be certified as one of the following: 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 4 OF 15 
a. California emergency medical technician (EMT) 
 
b. California Advanced EMT 
 
4. Have current CPR and EMT certifications at time of entry into a 
paramedic training program and remain current throughout all phases of 
training. 
 
5. Have a minimum of six (6) months full-time or one (1) year part-time EMT 
experience. 
 
B. Course Content 
 
1. Paramedic Training Program course hours shall consist of no less than 
one thousand and ninety (1090) hours and are divided as follows: 
 
a. Minimum of four-hundred and fifty (450) hours didactic instruction 
and skills laboratories. 
 
b. Minimum of one hundred and sixty (160) hours clinical experience. 
 
c. Minimum of four hundred and eighty (480) hours field internship 
with at least fifty (50) ALS contacts. An ALS patient contact shall 
be defined as the performance of one or more ALS skills, except 
cardiac monitoring and CPR. 
 
2. Excluded from program hours are: 
 
a. Course material designed to teach or test exclusively EMT 
knowledge or skills, including CPR. 
 
b. Examination for student eligibility. 
 
c. The teaching of any material not prescribed in the National EMS 
Education Standards – Paramedic. 
 
d. Written and practical student testing. 
 
e. Examination for paramedic licensure. 
 
3. Didactic Instruction and Skills Practice 
 
a. Didactic/skills practice shall consist of no less than four hundred 
and fifty (450) hours. 
 
b. The content of a paramedic course shall meet the current National 
EMS Education Standard, Paramedic Curriculum. 
 
c. Course shall include EMS Agency mandatory training programs, 
which reflect current practice and policies, Ref. No. 1200, 
Treatment Protocols and Ref. No. 1300, Medical Control 
Guidelines. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 5 OF 15 
d. Conduct periodic competency-based examinations and a final 
comprehensive written and practical examination using program 
passing criteria. 
 
e. No more than six students shall be assigned to one instructor 
during skills practice/laboratory. 
 
4. Clinical Education  
 
a. The clinical education and training shall consist of no less than 
one hundred and sixty (160) hours. 
 
i. A minimum of one hundred and twenty (120) hours must 
be assigned in a general acute care hospital. 
 
ii. An additional forty (40) hours may be assigned out of the 
hospital setting as approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
b. Program shall provide clinical assignments for 100% of their 
students within thirty (30) days of completion of didactic 
instruction. The course director and student may mutually agree to 
a later date in the event of a special circumstance such as student 
illness, death or birth in the family, student’s military duty, etc. 
 
c. Program shall have signed written agreements (to include end 
date) with each clinical facility. 
 
d. Clinical assignments shall include, but not limited to emergency, 
cardiac, surgical, obstetrical, and pediatric patients. 
 
e. No more than two (2) students shall be assigned to one preceptor 
or health care professional during the supervised clinical 
education, which includes direct patient care responsibilities. 
 
f. Medication administration and procedures shall include those in 
Ref. No. 803, Paramedic Scope of Practice and any paramedic 
skill that the precepting health care professional feels comfortable 
having the student perform with supervision. 
 
5. Field Internship 
 
a. The student must meet the EMS Agency requirements to intern in 
Los Angeles County and pass the written Accreditation 
Examination. 
 
b. Programs shall provide internship assignments for 100% of their 
students within ninety (90) days after completion of the clinical 
education. The course director and student may mutually agree to 
a later date in the event of a special circumstance such as student 
illness, death or birth in the family, student’s military duty, etc.  
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 6 OF 15 
c. Field internship shall consist of no less than four hundred and 
eighty (480) hours and shall not go beyond six (6) months from 
the date of beginning field internship. 
 
d. The field provider must be a primary 9-1-1 ALS provider with a 
minimum run volume of one thousand two hundred (1200) EMS 
responses in the previous calendar year. 
 
e. Programs shall have signed written agreements (to include end 
date) with ALS providers. 
 
f. Field preceptor assignments shall be coordinated with the training 
program and the ALS provider to ensure the preceptor has the 
required experience and training. 
 
g. No more than one intern shall be assigned to a response vehicle 
during the intern’s internship. 
 
h. The intern shall perform a minimum of fifty (50) ALS patient 
contacts. At least 50% of contacts shall be in the team lead role 
providing the full continuum of care, beginning with the initial 
contact through release of the patient to a receiving hospital or 
medical care facility. 
 
i. Documentation of the intern’s progress, including identified 
weaknesses or problems, shall be provided to the intern daily with 
a comprehensive evaluation at the 7
th
, 14
th
, and 20
th
 shift, and 
following extension shifts. 
 
j. Internship must be completed within 6 months after the end of the 
clinical phase. The course director and student may mutually 
agree to a later date in the event of a special circumstance such 
as student illness, death or birth in the family, student’s military 
duty, etc. 
 
k. Successful performance in the clinical and field setting shall be 
required prior to course completion. 
 
V. Teaching Staff Qualifications and Responsibilities  
 
Each program shall consist of a medical director, course director, principal instructor(s), 
clinical and field preceptor(s), and teaching assistants who meet all requirements. 
Nothing in this section precludes the same individual from being responsible for more 
than one (1) position. 
 
Any one of the following shall fulfill the requirement of being qualified by education and 
experience in methods, materials, and evaluation of instruction documented by at least 
forty (40) hours in teaching methodology. 
 
1. Four (4) semester units of upper division credit in educational materials, 
methods, and curriculum development, or equivalent. 
 
2. California State Fire Marshall (CSFM) “Instructor I and II. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 7 OF 15 
 
3. National Fire Academy’s (NFA) “Fire Service Instructional 
Methodology Course”, or equivalent. 
 
4. National Association of EMS Educators “EMS Instructor Course”. 
 
5. Courses which meet the U.S. Department of Transportation/National 
Highway Traffic Safety 2002 Guidelines for Educating EMS Instructors. 
 
A. Medical Director 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently licensed and in good standing in the State of California 
as a physician. 
 
b. Two (2) years experience in prehospital care in the last five (5) 
years. 
 
c. Qualified by education or experience in methods, materials, and 
evaluation of instruction. 
 
d. Attend the Los Angeles County EMS Orientation (new Medical 
Directors, only). 
 
2. Responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Review and approve educational content of the program 
curriculum, training objectives for clinical and field instruction, and 
to certify the ongoing appropriateness and medical accuracy of 
the program. 
 
b. Review and approve the quality of medical instruction, 
supervision, and evaluation of students in all areas of the 
program. 
 
c. Approve provisions for hospital and/or medical facilities for clinical 
and field internship experiences. 
 
d. Approve principal instructors in conjunction with the course 
director. 
 
B. Course Director 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently licensed in California as a physician, registered nurse, or 
paramedic who has a baccalaureate degree, or an individual who 
holds a baccalaureate degree in a related health field or 
education. 
 
b. Minimum of one (1) year experience in an administrative or 
management level position. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 8 OF 15 
 
c. Minimum of three (3) years academic or clinical experience in 
prehospital care education within the last five (5) years. 
 
d. Qualified by education and experience in methods, materials, and 
evaluation of instruction. 
 
e. Attend the Los Angeles County EMS Orientation (new Course 
Directors only). 
 
2. Responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Provide administrative oversight, organize, and supervise the 
educational program. 
 
b. Approve principal instructor(s), teaching assistant(s), clinical and 
field preceptors, in conjunction with the Medical Director. 
 
c. Approve clinical and field internship assignments. 
 
d. Coordinate the development of curriculum, including instructional 
objectives, and approve all methods of evaluation. 
 
e. Ensure training program compliance with State regulations, 
current EMS policies, and other related laws. 
 
f. Sign all course completion records. 
 
g. Maintain all course records for a period of four (4) years. 
 
C. Principal Instructor(s) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently licensed in California as a physician, registered nurse, 
physician assistant, or paramedic. 
 
b. Two (2) years experience in advanced life support prehospital 
care. 
 
c. Knowledgeable in the course content of the most recent National 
EMS Education Standards, Paramedic course curriculum. 
 
d. Work Experience and Education: 
 
i. Six (6) years experience in an allied health field and an 
associate degree; OR 
 
ii. Two (2) years experience in an allied health field and a 
baccalaureate degree. 
 
e. Qualified by education and experience in methods, materials, and 
evaluation of instruction. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 9 OF 15 
 
2. Responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Curriculum development 
 
b. Course coordination 
 
c. Course instruction 
 
D. Teaching Assistant(s) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
Teaching Assistant (s) are qualified by training and experience in 
prehospital care. A teaching assistant shall be supervised by a principal 
instructor, the course director, and/or the medical director. 
 
2. Responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Assist with teaching the course. 
 
b. Teach and test the required skills. 
 
E. Hospital/Medical Facility Clinical Preceptor(s) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently licensed in California as a physician, registered nurse, or 
physician assistant. 
 
b. Worked in emergency medical care for the last two (2) years. 
 
e. Received instruction in evaluating paramedic students in the 
clinical setting which may include educational brochures, 
orientation, clinical training programs, or training videos. 
 
2. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Create a positive and supportive learning environment. 
 
b. Evaluate student ability to safely administer medications and 
perform assessments. 
 
c. Assess student behaviors using cognitive, psychomotor, and 
affective domains. 
 
d. Document student performance using established criteria. 
 
e. Identify appropriate student progress. 
 
f. Counsel the student who is not progressing. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 10 OF 15 
g. Utilize training program support services available to the student 
and the preceptor. 
 
h. Contact appropriate training program personnel regarding a 
student who is ill, injured, or has had an exposure to a 
communicable disease or hazardous material. 
 
3. A clinical preceptor shall be supervised by a principal instructor, the 
course director, and/or the medical director. 
 
F. Field Preceptor(s) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently licensed in California as a paramedic and accredited by 
Los Angeles County EMS Agency. 
 
b. Working in the field as a licensed paramedic providing direct 
patient care for the last two (2) years. 
 
c. Completed field preceptor training approved by the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to: 
 
a. Create a positive and supportive learning environment. 
 
b. Measure students against the standard of entry level paramedics. 
 
c. Assess student behaviors using cognitive, psychomotor, and 
affective domains. 
 
d. Perform and document daily, cumulative, and final evaluation of 
students using written field criteria. 
 
e. Identify appropriate student progress. 
 
f. Counsel the student who is not progressing. 
 
g. Utilize training program support services available to the student 
and the preceptor. 
 
h. Contact appropriate training program personnel regarding a 
student who is ill, injured, or has had an exposure to a 
communicable disease or hazardous material. 
 
i. Ensure the required minimum number of fifty (50) ALS contacts 
are met. 
 
3. A field preceptor shall be supervised by a principal instructor, the course 
director, and/or the medical director. 
  

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 11 OF 15 
VI. Course Completion Records 
 
 The training program shall issue a tamper resistant Course Completion Record no later 
than ten (10) working days from the date of successful completion of the program. The 
document must include the following information and statements: 
 
A. Name of the individual. 
 
B. Date of course completion. 
 
C. Name of the paramedic training program approving authority. 
 
D. Signature of the program medical director, optional. 
 
E. Signature of the course director. 
 
F. Name and location of the training program issuing the course completion record. 
 
G. Statement: The individual named on this record has successfully completed an 
approved paramedic training program. 
 
H. Statement in bold print: THIS IS NOT A PARAMEDIC LICENSE. 
 
I. Course hours of instruction divided into didactic/skills instruction, clinical training 
and field internship with a minimum of fifty (50) ALS patient contacts. In lieu of 
placing on the completion record, these may be addressed in a letter on official 
program letterhead. 
 
J. List of optional scope of practice procedures and/or medications taught in the 
course approved pursuant to subsection §100146 (c) (2) (A-D) of the California 
Code of Regulations, Title 22. In lieu of placing on the completion record, these 
may be addressed in a letter on official program letterhead. 
 
K. List of additional National ALS courses completed (ACLS, PALS, PHTLS, PEPP, 
etc.). In lieu of placing on the completion record, these may be addressed in a 
letter on official program letterhead. 
 
VI. Record Keeping 
 
Each program shall maintain the following records for four (4) years: 
 
A. All required documentation as specified in the application packet for program 
approval. 
 
B. Paramedic Program Class Roster. 
 
C. Documentation of course completion certificates issued. 
 
D. Original documentation or summaries of student performance and course 
evaluations. 
 
E. Curriculum vitae for instructors with a copy of current licenses and certifications 
in their field of expertise, or evidence of specialized training. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 12 OF 15 
VII. Program Reporting 
 
A. During the approved program period, the EMS Agency shall be notified in writing, 
a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance, of any changes in the following: 
 
1. Summary of changes to curriculum 
 
2. Hours of instruction 
 
3. Program staff 
 
4. Clinical or field internship sites 
 
B. The training program shall submit a complete course schedule thirty (30) days 
prior to the start of each course. 
 
C. The training program shall submit a course roster and student application a 
minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the Accreditation Examination. Programs 
shall coordinate with the EMS Agency’s Office of Certification for scheduling the 
Accreditation Examination. 
 
IX. Program Re-approval 
 
A. The training program must receive and maintain CAAHEP accreditation to be 
considered eligible to be re-approved. The training program shall continue to 
meet all requirements to be considered for renewal. 
 
B. Application for re-approval process: 
 
1. Submit a written request for re-approval to the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Obtain a re-approval application packet. 
 
C. Submit the following to the EMS Agency:  
 
All documentation submitted to and received from CoAEMSP and CAAHEP 
during the approved program period to include, but not limited to the current list 
of teaching staff and a copy of the current accreditation certificate. 
 
X. Fees 
 
Payment of the established fee, if applicable, is due at the time of initial program 
approval, or for program re-approval must be submitted with the re-approval application. 
 
XI. Responsibilities of the EMS Agency 
 
A. Process Applications 
 
1. Notify the program applicant in writing within ninety (90) days from the 
receipt of a complete application of the decision to approve or deny. The 
application is only considered for approval if it is complete and all 
requirements have been met. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 13 OF 15 
a. Notify the program applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt of the 
application that the application was received and/or what 
information is deficient, or is missing, and the date the information 
is due. 
 
b. Failure to submit requested information within specified time frame 
after receiving written notification shall render the application null 
and void. 
 
2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the EMS Agency shall establish 
the effective date of program approval. 
 
3. Initial approval and re-approval shall be for a period of four (4) years. 
Program approval or disapproval shall be made in writing by the EMS 
Agency to the program applicant. 
 
B. Audit Programs  
 
Approved paramedic training programs shall be subject to a site survey prior to 
initial program period and periodic on-site evaluations during the approved period 
by the EMS Agency. 
 
XII. Program Disciplinary Actions 
 
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of CCR Div. 9, Ch. 4, et seq., such as 
violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting 
the violation of, or conspiring to violate any of the terms of the California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 4; the California Health and Safety Code, Division 
2.5; or Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Prehospital Care 
Policies shall result in disciplinary action. 
 
B. The requirements for training program noncompliance notification and actions 
are as follows: 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall provide notification of noncompliance to the 
paramedic training program. This notification shall be in writing and sent 
by certified mail to the training program director. 
 
2. Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the noncompliance notification, the 
training program shall submit in writing, by certified mail, to the EMS 
Agency one (1) of the following: 
 
a. Evidence of compliance with the provisions of Chapter 4, or 
 
b. A plan to comply with the provisions of Chapter 4 within 
sixty (60) days from receipt of the notification of noncompliance. 
 
3. Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the training program’s response, or 
if no response is received from the training program then within thirty (30) 
calendar days from the mailing date of the noncompliance notification, the 
EMS Agency shall issue a decision letter by certified mail to the State of 
California EMS Authority and the training program. The letter shall identify 
the EMS Agency’s decision to take one or more of the following actions: 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 14 OF 15 
a. Accept the evidence of compliance provided. 
 
b. Accept the plan for meeting compliance. 
 
c. Place the training program on probation. 
 
d. Suspend the training program. 
 
e. Revoke the training program. 
 
4. The decision letter shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
 
a. The date of the EMS Agency’s decision. 
 
b. The specific provisions found to be noncompliant. 
 
c. The probation or suspension effective and ending date, if 
applicable. 
 
d. The terms and conditions of the probation or suspension, if 
applicable. 
 
e. The revocation effective date, if applicable. 
 
C. If the training program does not comply with subsection VII., B., 2, of this 
reference, the EMS Agency may uphold the noncompliance finding and initiate a 
probation, suspension, or revocation action as described in subsection VII., B., 
3., of this reference. 
 
D. The EMS Agency shall establish the probation, suspension, or revocation 
effective dates no sooner than sixty (60) days after the date of the decision letter 
as described in subsection VII., B., 3., of this reference. 
 
E. Causes for actions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
a. Failure to correct identified deficiencies within the specified length of time 
after receiving written notice from the EMS Agency. 
 
b. Misrepresentation of any fact by a training program of any required 
information. 
 
F. A paramedic training program is ineligible to reapply for approval following a 
denial or revocation for a minimum of twelve (12) months. 
 
G. If a training program is placed on probation, the terms of probation shall be 
determined by the EMS Agency. During the probationary period, the EMS 
Agency must give prior approval for all programs offered. Course documents 
must be submitted to the EMS Agency at least thirty (30) days prior to each 
course being offered. The EMS Agency shall provide written notification of 
program approval to the program director within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of 
the request. Renewal of the training program is contingent upon completion of 
the probationary period. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM APPROVAL REFERENCE NO. 901 
PAGE 15 OF 15 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 802, Los Angeles County EMT Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 802.1, Los Angeles County EMT Scope of Practice (Field Reference) 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803.1, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice (Field Reference) 
Ref. No. 1006, Paramedic Accreditation
