# cms1 246111

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, HOSPITALS) 
SUBJECT: EMS RESOURCE GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 842.1 
FOR MASS GATHERINGS AND 
SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-16  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 04-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-16 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish resource guidelines for Emergency Medical Services (EMS) during 
mass gatherings and special events of various sizes and intensity.  
 
AUTHORITY:  Health & Safety Code, Section 1797.220 
 Los Angeles County Code Title 7, Business Licenses, Chapter 7.16, 
 Ambulances 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Cooling Station: An air-conditioned public facility or shelter where people may go for relief 
during periods of extreme heat. 
 
Event Medical Facility/Medical Station: A temporary location with the ability to provide basic 
and advanced medical care. 
 
An Event Medical Facility/Medical Station/First Aid Station may be staffed with a: 
 
First Responder (F.R.): A person who is trained to provide first aid. 
 
EMT: A person who is trained to provide first aid level care within the scope of practice 
of an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) that is currently licensed by the State of 
California and LA County accredited. 
 
EMT-P: A person who is trained to provide advanced first aid level care within the scope 
of practice of a paramedic that is currently licensed by the State of California and LA 
County accredited. 
 
Nurse: The nurse must hold a current California license. It is preferred that the nurse 
have experience in emergency medical care and triage of seriously ill or injured patients. 
 
Physician: The physician must hold a current California license and be Board Certified 
or Eligible in Emergency Medicine. 
 
First Aid Station: A temporary location with the ability to provide first aid and/or basic medical 
care. 
 
Medical Cart: A motorized, drivable mode of transportation (e.g. golf cart or all-terrain vehicle 
(ATV)) with the capacity to transport a patient in the supine position, and is staffed with a mobile 
team. 
 
Mobile Cart: A motorized, drivable mode of transportation (e.g. golf cart or ATV) with the 
capacity to transport a patient in a sitting position and is staffed with a mobile team. 

SUBJECT: EMS RESOURCE GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 842.1 
FOR MASS GATHERINGS AND 
SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
 
Mobile Teams: A team of two or more EMT or higher medical personnel that has appropriate 
treatment supplies commensurate to the provider’s skill level, and has communications 
capability with, at a minimum, the First Aid Station. Mobile teams are separate from ambulance 
personnel. 
 
Warming Station: A shelter where people can go to stay warm and dry. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Mass gathering events should have event-specific medical action plans (MAP) that meet 
guidelines outlined in this policy. Some events, such as high intensity events, may 
require additional resources in order to protect health and safety beyond these 
recommendations. Final approval of a MAP is at the discretion of the jurisdictional 
provider agency. 
 
2. Staffing modifications may be required by the jurisdictional provider agency based on the 
type of event. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The jurisdictional provider agency may require the event venue/promoter to  make free 
drinking water readily available. 
 
II. Event venue/promoter must provide adequate signage to direct participants to 
medical/first aid stations, water, and cooling/warming stations. 
 
III.   Depending on history and size of an event, the jurisdictional provider agency and/or 
EMS Agency may require additional medical resources in order to safely provide 
services at an event. Additionally, the event medical aid facility may be required to 
provide services for up to four hours or more post event to ensure continuation of 
medical care and to provide ongoing medical coverage for event participants. 
 
IV. All on site medical personnel shall be accredited/certified/licensed and follow Los 
Angeles County Prehospital Care Policies and Protocols. 
 
V. All medical equipment and supplies must be equivalent to the level of service (BLS, 
ALS) being provided. 
 
VI. Event medical providers must have radio communication with the jurisdictional provider 
agency at all times during the event. 
 
VII. Event provider, in conjunction with the Department of Public Health, should provide harm 
reduction and education about specific hazards, which may include, but not limited to, 
alcohol and drugs that may be present at an event. 
 
VIII. Mass gatherings and special events have been placed into categories as identified 
below.  Each of these categories are then broken down by “levels” with the medical 
staffing recommendations specified for each level as follows: 
 
  

SUBJECT: EMS RESOURCE GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 842.1 
FOR MASS GATHERINGS AND 
SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
 
Los Angeles County, Emergency Medical Services Agency 
Prehospital Care Policy, Ref. 842.1 
Mass Gatherings & Special Event Staffing Level Recommendations 
(Based on Peak Attendance Estimates) 
 
Medical Faculty (Fac.) to have AED certified member with device. 
Mobile and Medical Facility Personnel must have radio communications with Command 
Staff. 
Mobile and Medical Carts may be staffed by Medical Facility or Mobile Personnel as 
needed. 
SPECIAL EVENT 
Low Intensity 
(no alcohol) 
 
 5k to 10k          Level 1 
10k to 20k         Level 2 
20k to 30k         Level 3 
30k to 40k         Level 4 
40k to 50k         Level 5 
>50k                  Level 6 
SPECIAL EVENT 
Low Intensity 
(alcohol permitted) 
 
 5k to 10k          Level 5 
10k to 25k         Level 6 
25k to 40k         Level 7 
40k to
 50k         Level 8 
>50k                  Level 9 
 
SPECIAL EVENT 
Moderate Intensity 
(alcohol permitted) 
 
 5k to 10k        Level 5 
10k to 20k       Level 6 
20k to 30k       Level 7 
30k to 40         Level 8 
40k to 50         Level 9 
>50k                Level 10 
SPECIAL EVENT 
High Intensity 
(alcohol permitted) 
 
<=3k                Level 6 
3k to 15k         Level 8 
15k to 30k       Level 9 
30k to 40k       Level 10 
40k to 50k       Level 11 
>50k                Level 12 
 
Event 
Level 
1
st
 Aid 
Tent 
(F.R.) 
Med 
Fac. 
EMT 
Med 
Fac. 
PM 
Med 
Fac. 
RN 
Med 
Fac. 
MD 
Mobile 
EMT 
(F.R.) 
Mobile 
PM/EMT 
(1 each) 
Mobile 
Cart 
Medical 
Cart 
w/gurney 
BLS 
Amb. 
ALS 
Ambulance 
Level 1  1            
Level 2 1 1    1      
Level 3 1 1    1      
Level 4 1 1    1 1   1  
Level 5  2    1 1 1  1  
Level 6  2 1 1   2 1   1 
Level 7  2 1 1  1 2 1  1 1  
Level 8  1 2 1  1 1 1  1 1 2 
Level 9  1 2 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 3 
Level 10  1 2 2 1  2 2 1 1 1 3  
Level 11  1 2 3 2 2 3 1 1 1 3 
Level 12  2 2 4 2 2 4 2 1 1 3 
 
IX. Event venue/promoter must provide the following outdoor weather contingency 
requirements: 
 
A. Hot Weather 
 
1. 80 to 89 Degrees 
 
• Free drinking water readily available with signage. 
• Cooling station(s) suitable to the number of participants. 
 
2. 90 to 94 Degrees 
 
• Free drinking water readily available with signage. 
• Cooling station(s) suitable to the number of participants. 
• Minimum of one shade area to include misters/cooling station(s). 

SUBJECT: EMS RESOURCE GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 842.1 
FOR MASS GATHERINGS AND 
SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
• Mobile cart added to Levels 5 & 6. 
• One additional ALS Ambulance or MD for Level 10 events. 
 
3. 95 Degrees and Above 
 
• Free drinking water readily available with signage. 
• Cooling station(s) suitable to the number of participants. 
• Half of canopy shade areas to include misters (one 
minimum)/cooling station(s). 
• Mobile cart added to Levels 5 & 6. 
• Second mobile cart added for Level 7 or greater. 
• One additional ALS Ambulance or MD for Level 9 or greater 
events. 
• MD treatment tent(s) to include portable air conditioning. 
 
B. Cold Weather 
 
1. Rain 
 
• Disposable (aluminum/mylar) blankets suitable to the number of 
participants. 
 
2. Below 60 Degrees 
 
• Portable heaters and disposable (aluminum/mylar) blankets 
suitable for number of participants. 
• Consider warming stations, if needed.   
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 842, Mass Gathering and Special Events Interface with Emergency Medical 
Services
