# cms1 206939

In Case of Emergency 
I.C.E.
 
 
 
The I.C.E. (In Case of Emergency) phone numbers was the idea of paramedic 
Bob Brotchie of Britain’s East Anglian Ambulance Service.  It was launched with 
the support of Vodafone in May of 2005 in Great Britain and has increased in 
popularity across England, the United States and Australia since the July 7, 2005 
bombings in London, England.   
 
In 2003, nearly 900,000 emergency victims in the US were not able to provide 
contact information to emergency workers.  Storing important contact phone 
numbers in your cell phone can assist emergency services if you are unable.  
Unfortunately like most people, we store our phone numbers on our cell phone 
using first names.  We know who everyone is, but a paramedic, doctor, police 
officer or nurse has no idea who to call in the event of an emergency.  The I.C.E. 
contacts allow a person to designate whom they would like contacted on their 
behalf if they are unable to give information to emergency personnel.   
 
How to begin.... 
•    Choose 3 people you want contacted in case of emergency. 
•    Make sure your I.C.E. contacts have agreed to be a contact person 
and explain what this means. 
•    Give your I.C.E. contact a list of people and phone numbers you 
want notified. 
•    Your I.C.E. contacts should be aware of any medical conditions, 
allergies, medications your are currently taking and have a copy of 
an advanced health care directive if you have one. 
•    Enter your I.C.E. contacts into your cell phones address book or 
contacts list and attach the decal to your cell phone. 
•    Fill out the I.C.E. wallet card and place in your wallet. 
 
Storing I.C.E. information on your cell phone... 
•    Open your address book/contacts in your cell phone. 
•    Use a “.” or “-“ in front of the first letter to make your I.C.E. contact 
the first entry to come up when your address book is opened 
(“.ICE”). 
•    Type the acronym ICE followed by a name or title  
(i.e. “.ICE-husband). 
•    Save the phone number. 
•    Attach the I.C.E. decal to your phone. This way emergency workers 
know you have the information readily available.  
 

We also realize that the cell phone has to remain with the victim (or otherwise be 
identifiable as his) in order to be of use.  While most wallets and purses will 
contain some items bearing photographs that can be matched to their owners, a 
cell phone doesn’t necessarily provide any direct means of identifying its owner.  
Therefore we went another step and developed the I.C.E. wallet card, which can 
be filled out and left in your wallet with the same life saving information available.  
 
In addition a window decal is available for you car in the hopes that emergency 
workers will start looking for your I.C.E. information early.   
 
In Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency (EMS Agency), has 
adopted this idea and is promoting the use for the citizens and employees of this 
county.  If you are interested in obtaining any of these valuable items please 
contact Jacqueline Rifenburg at (323) 890-8666 or jrifenburg@ladhs.org
  
 
Three simple letters that could help save lives.
