# cms1 206307

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC) 
SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT  REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-30-78        PAGE 1 OF 6 
REVISED: 07-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-22 
 
   
APPROVED:  _________________________     __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency         Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide minimum equipment standards for private basic life support (BLS) 
ambulance providers and to ensure a system wide standardized inventory of 
supplies and equipment to promote safety, readiness, and the ability to meet the 
requirements of an “all hazards” disaster response in the event of a declared 
emergency. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Administrative Code, Title 13, Section 1103 
California Highway Patrol (CHP) Handbook 82.4, Chapter 4.5:  Recommended 
Ambulance Equipment 
California Vehicle Code Section 2418.5 
Health and Safety Code 1797.220 and 1798  
Senate Bill 409 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Personal Protective Equipment:  For the purpose of this policy, personal protective equipment 
(PPE) is garments/equipment designed to protect/minimize hazardous exposure to prehospital 
care responders. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Ambulances shall be maintained in good mechanical repair and sanitary condition.  
 
2. Any equipment carried for use in providing emergency medical care must be maintained 
in clean condition and good working order. Medical supplies and solutions shall be 
replaced prior to the expiration date. 
 
3. All reusable medical supplies and equipment should be maintained in clean, ready-to-
use condition and be disinfected or sterilized per manufacturer’s recommendations.  
 
4. Whenever a patient with a known or suspected communicable disease has been 
transported, the patient compartment and all interior surfaces, including fixed equipment, 
should be thoroughly cleansed with soap, water, and disinfectant. Supplies such as 
pillows, blankets, and linens should be disposable or autoclaved. * (* indicates language 
specific to the CHP Handbook) 
 
5. All ambulance providers must be integrated into the disaster medical response system in 
order to participate in state and local disaster response or a declared emergency. 
 
6. Ambulance personnel should not function within an operational area requiring PPE 
beyond their level of provision and training. 
 
7. In any workplace where N95, or equivalent masks are necessary to protect the health of 
employees or whenever such masks are required by the employer, the employer shall 
have a written policy and provide training in the proper use and operation of the device. 

SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT           REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
PAGE 2 OF 6 
 
NOTE:  Ambulances dedicated for infant transportation or when staffed and 
equipped for use in conjunction with newborn intensive care nursery services as 
specified in Title 22, CAC, Sections 70481 – 70487, need not concurrently carry 
items of emergency care equipment or supplies as specified herein that would 
interfere with the specialized care and transportation of an infant in an incubator 
or isolette. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Required Vehicle Safety Equipment: 
 
A. A siren and steady burning red warning lamp that meet requirements established 
by the CHP Handbook, Section 818. 
 
B. Seat belts or equivalent restraints for every sitting position. A child or infant not 
secured to a gurney should be secured in an appropriate child/infant restraint 
device. 
 
C. A fire extinguisher of the dry chemical or the carbon dioxide type, with a minimum 
4-B:C rating, maintained as prescribed by the State Fire Marshal in Title 19, 
CAC, Section 597.  The use of vaporizing liquid extinguishers is prohibited. 
 
D. A portable, battery-operated light. 
 
E. A spare wheel with inflated tire of the appropriate load rating. 
 
F. A jack and tools for wheel changes. 
 
G. Maps or electronic mapping device covering the areas in which the ambulance 
provides service. 
 
H. Patient compartment door latches operable from inside and outside the vehicle 
on all emergency ambulances manufactured and first registered after  
January 1, 1980. 
 
II. Personnel PPE Training 
 
Prior to use, all personnel who may be required to utilize PPE shall receive training in 
accordance with OSHA requirements (Ref. 26 CFR 1910.132 [f]. At minimum, training 
shall consist of: 
 
A. Identification of when and what type of PPE is necessary; how to properly don, 
doff, adjust, and wear PPE; the limitations of the PPE; and the proper care, 
maintenance, useful life, and disposal of the PPE (Ref. 29 CFR 1910.132 [f] [1] 
[1-5]). 
 
B. Demonstration of the ability to use PPE properly before being allowed to perform 
work requiring the use of PPE (Ref. 29 CFR 1910.132 [f] [2]. 
 
C. Verification that each employee has received and understands the required 
training through a written certification that contains the course title, date of the 
training, and the name of the employee trained. 

SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT           REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
PAGE 3 OF 6 
 
D. Proper fit testing for any respiratory protection in accordance with OSHA 
requirements (Ref. 29 CFR 1910.134). 
 
III. Minimum Levels of Recommended Emergency Care Equipment and Supplies 
 
MINIMUM INVENTORY  QUANTITIES 
Adhesive tape, rolls of 1 in., 2 in. and, 3 in. 2 each 
Ankle and wrist restraints. 
• If soft ties are used, they should be at least three inches wide 
(before tying) to maintain a two inch width while in use. 
1 set 
Bandages, 4 in. sterile compresses or equivalent 12 
Bag-valve device with 0
2 
inlet and reservoir 
• Bag Volume 400-700 mL 
1
 
• Bag Volume 900-1500 mL 
1
 
1 each 
Bag-valve mask 
• Large 
• Medium 
• Small adult/child 
• Toddler 
• Infant 
• Neonate 
1 each 
Bandages, 2 in. or 3 in. soft, rolled stretch (Kerlix or Kling type) 6 
Bandages, 3 in. x 3 in. or 4 in. x 4 in. sterile gauze pads 4 
Bandages, universal dressings (trauma dressings), 10 in. x 30 in or larger 2 
Bandage scissors 1 
Bedpan/fracture pan 1 
Blood pressure manometer, cuff and stethoscope: 
• Thigh 
• Adult 
• Child 
• Infant 
1 each 
*Cervical Collars, rigid: 
• Adult 
• Child 
• Infant     *2 pediatric adjustable meets infant requirement 
2 each 
Dextrose – glucose paste/gel 15gms 
Emesis basin, disposable bags or covered containers 1 
Hemostatic dressings–EMS Authority approved dressings only - optional 2 
Immobilizer, Head: 
• Disposable or Reusable 
2 

SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT           REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
PAGE 4 OF 6 
MINIMUM INVENTORY  QUANTITIES 
Manometer (Optional) 2 
Obstetrical supplies, sterile, including (no scalpel):  
• Gloves 
• Umbilical cord clamps 
• Dressings, towels 
• Scissors 
• Bulb syringe 
• Clear plastic bag 
1 kit or 
supplies as 
indicated 
Oropharyngeal airways: 
• Two (2) adult 
• Two (2) children 
• One (1) infant 
• One (1) newborn 
6 
Oxygen cannulas 
• Adult 
• Child 
1each 
Oxygen masks, non-rebreather 
• Adult 
• Child 
• Infant 
1 each 
Oxygen masks, simple (Optional) 
• Adult 
• Child 
• Infant  
1 each 
Oxygen, portable 
• “D” or “E” FULL cylinder with one (1) oxygen flow control regulator 
for use between both cylinders 
1 
Oxygen, vehicle (house) 
• “M” or “H” cylinder with a minimum of 1000 psi and one (1) oxygen 
flow control regulator 
1 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
(Personal Body Substance Isolation Equipment) 
• mask 
• gown 
• eye protection 
2 each 
Saline, sterile isotonic, in clearly labeled plastic liter (quart) containers  2 
Spine boards, rigid, approximately 14 inches in width, and approximately 72 
inches in length with straps for immobilization of suspected spinal or back 
injuries 
2 
Splints, short, medium, and long 
• Cardboard splints (recommended for general use) 
• Inflatable air splints (recommended to immobilize lower arms and 
lower legs) (Optional) 
4 each 

SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT           REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
PAGE 5 OF 6 
MINIMUM INVENTORY  QUANTITIES 
Splints, traction 1 
Stretchers: 
• Stretchers with wheels and the following: 
o mattresses should be covered with impervious plastic 
material or the equivalent 
o have the capability to elevate both the head and foot 
o straps to secure the patient to the stretcher, including 
shoulders, waist, and legs  
o a means of securing the stretcher in the vehicle 
o adjustable to four different levels 
1 
• Collapsible stretcher and the following: 
o straps to secure the patient to the stretcher and a means of 
securing the stretcher in the vehicle 
1 
• Device to secure a child or infant to the stretcher 
1 
Suction equipment, portable, capable of at least: 
• a negative pressure equivalent to 300mm of mercury 
• 30 liter per minute air flow rate for 30 minutes of operation. 
1 
Suction equipment, vehicle (house), capable of at least: 
• a negative pressure equivalent to 300mm of mercury 
• 30 liter per minute air flow rate for 30 minutes of operation 
1 
Suction Tubing: 
• Non-collapsible, plastic, semi-rigid, whistle-tipped, finger controlled 
type is preferred. *   
• Flexible catheters for tracheostomy suctioning (8Fr.-12Fr.) 
1 each 
Thermometer (Oral or axillary) 1 
Tongue depressors 6 
Tourniquets (commercial, for control of bleeding) 2 
Water, sterile, (quarts)  2 
Urinal 1 
Chemotherapy spill kit (Optional) 1 
 
PERSONAL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT (PPE)* QUANTITIES 
Escape hood (Optional) 2 
Gloves, work (multiple use, leather) 2 pairs 
Hearing protection 2 sets 
Jacket, EMS, with reflective stripes 2 
Rescue helmet 2 
Respiratory protection mask (N95) and general purpose mask 2 each 

SUBJECT:  BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT           REFERENCE NO. 710 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
PAGE 6 OF 6 
PERSONAL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT (PPE)* QUANTITIES 
Safety vest meeting ANSI standards or equivalent 2 
* OSHA Safety & Health Information Bulletin: “CBRN Escape Respirator”, provides guidance on use, 
selection, and training. The minimum PPE is Level D, if applicable. 
 
AMBULANCE STRIKE TEAM ADDITIONAL SUPPLIES* QUANTITIES 
Ballistic vest, protective (Optional – risk dependent**) 2 
Field Operations Guide (FOG) 1 
Footwear covers, single use 2 pairs 
Duodote (atropine 2.1mg and pralidoxime chloride 600mg) or equivalent 
(Optional) 
1/person  
MRE (meal ready to eat) (3 meals/day/member for 3 days) 18 
 
*Maintained at deployment location, not required in vehicle unless deployed. 
**Mandatory for deployment to areas of civil unrest. 
1 
Device volume, not delivered volume. 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
OSHA Regulations: 
Ref. No. 29 CFR 1910.132 
Ref. No. 29 CFR 1910.134 
OSHA Safety & Health Information Bulletin: “CBRN Escape Respirator”  
 
Emergency Medical Services Authority (EMSA):  
EMSA Guidelines #216 
 
California Highway Patrol: 
Ref. 299, Ambulance Inventory 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 704, Assessment Unit Inventory
