# cms1 206344

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT/PARAMEDIC/MICN) 
SUBJECT: SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT REFERENCE NO. 822 
 REPORTING GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-83 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-22 
 
 
APPROVED: _______________________ _________________________________ 
    Director, EMS Agency    Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines and procedures for prehospital care personnel to report 
suspected child abuse. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Penal Code, Chapter 916, Sections 11164-11174.3 
County of Los Angeles Department of Children and Family 
Services 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Agencies authorized to accept mandated reports: Any police department or sheriff’s 
department, and the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) Child Protection 
Hotline (CPH). School district police and security departments are not authorized to accept 
reports. 
 
Child: Any person less than eighteen years of age. 
 
Mandated reporter: Any healthcare practitioner, childcare custodian, or an employee of a 
child protective agency. This includes EMTs and paramedics. 
 
Neglect: The negligent treatment or maltreatment of a child by a person responsible for the 
child’s welfare under circumstances indicating harm or threatened harm to the child’s 
health or welfare. The term includes both acts and omissions on the part of the responsible 
person. 
 
Physical abuse: Physical injury or death inflicted by other than accidental means upon a 
child by another person. 
 
Sexual abuse: Sexual assault or the exploitation of a minor. Sexual assault includes, but 
is not limited to, any intrusion by one person into the genitals; anal opening of a child; oral 
copulation intentional touching for the purposes of sexual arousal or gratification, or 
masturbation in the presence of a child. Sexual exploitation includes conduct involving 
matters depicting minors engaged in obscene acts; and/or prostitution. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The purpose of reporting suspected child abuse/neglect is to protect the child, 
prevent further abuse of the child and other children in the home, and to 
facilitate treatment for the entire family. The presence of abuse, rather than 
the degree of that abuse, is the determinant for intervention by DCFS and 
law enforcement. 

SUBJECT: SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT REFERENCE NO. 822 
 REPORTING GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
2. California Penal Code, Sections 11166 and 11168, require mandated 
reporters to promptly report all suspected non-accidental injuries, sexual 
abuse, or neglect of children that they suspect, have knowledge of, or 
observe in their professional capacity. A verbal report shall be made to 
DCFS Child Protection Hotline immediately, or as soon as practically 
possible, and the Suspected Child Abuse Report shall be completed within 
36 hours. 
In Los Angeles County, it is recommended that a report be made to local 
law enforcement as well. 
3. It is not necessary for the mandated reporter to determine child abuse but only 
to suspect that it may have occurred. Law enforcement, DCFS and the courts 
determine whether child abuse/neglect has, in fact, occurred. 
 
4. Current law mandates (CPC 11166) all healthcare professionals to report 
suspected child abuse/neglect that they know of or observe in their 
professional capacity. Mandated reporters are required to sign a statement 
acknowledging their understanding of the law (See Ref. No. 822.3, Sample 
Employee Acknowledgement as a Mandated Reporter). Any person who fails to 
report as required may be punished by a fine or imprisonment. 
 
5. When  a  mandated  reporter  suspects  or  has  observed  child  abuse/neglect, 
that  individual  is  required  to  report  by  telephone  to  local  law  enforcement 
and/or to DCFS Child Protection Hotline. 
 
6. When two or more mandated reporters are present at scene and jointly know 
or suspect an instance of child abuse/neglect, a member of the reporting team 
may be designated to report on behalf of the team. Any member who knows 
that the designated reporter failed to uphold their agreement shall thereafter 
make the report. If paramedics are not selected as the designated reporters, 
they shall document the name and agency of the designated reporting team 
member on the EMS Report Form. 
 
7. Persons legally required to report suspected child abuse are immune 
from criminal or civil liability for reporting as required. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Reporting Procedure 
 
A. Notify local law enforcement immediately if a child is suspected to be in 
imminent danger. Prehospital care providers should be aware of their local law 
enforcement reporting procedures and telephone numbers for notification. 
 
B. Call the 24-hour Child Protection Hotline at (800) 540-4000 as soon as 
possible to make the verbal report. (Refer to 822.1 for reporting options and 
instructions). 
 

SUBJECT: SUSPECTED CHILD ABUSE/NEGLECT REFERENCE NO. 822 
 REPORTING GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
DCFS has implemented the Child Protection Hotline Priority line for Medical 
Providers to ensure immediate connection to the Hotline. Upon dialing the 
hotline number listed above, press * within the first 10 seconds of the call and 
a prompt will request a code be entered. Enter the code 3237 (DCFS). Once 
the code is entered, the caller will be given options to select. 
 
Press 1 for safely surrendered baby 
 
 Press 4 for all other inquiries (Child Report –Medical queue) 
 
The telephone report shall include the following: 
• Name of the person making the report 
• Name of the child 
• Present location of the child 
• Nature and extent of the injury 
• Information that led reporting party to suspect child abuse 
The reporting party will be provided with a Referral Number (Case Number) that shall be 
transcribed onto Form SS8572 in the upper right hand corner under “Case Number” 
Within 36 hours: 
1. Compete and submit the Suspected Child Abuse Report (SS8572), 
that is accessible on the DCFS web site at http://dcfs.lacounty.gov 
 
OR 
 
2. Complete a hard copy according to the instructions on the back of 
the form (Ref. No. 822.2 and 822.2a, SS8572). The completed form 
must be mailed to local law enforcement and either mailed to DCFS 
(1933 
S. Broadway Avenue, 5
th 
floor, Los Angeles, CA 90007) or 
faxed (213) 745-1728 or (213) 745-1730 
 
C. Document the following on the EMS Report Form 
 
1. The name of the DCFS social worker and/or name, department 
and badge number of the law enforcement officer contacted. 
 
2. Time of notification 
 
3. Disposition of the child 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Reference No. 822.1, Guide to Suspected Child Abuse Reporting 
Reference No. 822.2, Suspected Child Abuse Report Form SS 8572 
Reference No. 822.2a, Definitions and General Instructions for Completion of 
Form SS 8572 
Reference No. 822.3, Sample Employee Acknowledgement as a Mandated Reporter
