# cms1 206195

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES  
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: AUTHORIZATION FOR PARAMEDIC 
 PROVIDER STATUS  REFERENCE NO. 406 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-82  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 10-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the criteria to be approved as a paramedic provider in Los Angeles 
County. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.52, 1797.94, 1797.178, 
1797.180, 1797.201 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100166, 100167, 100169, 
100400 and 100402 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
1. Providers applying for paramedic provider status must complete the application process 
in its entirety, including written approval from the EMS Agency prior to commencing 
operations. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Eligibility Requirements 
 
A. In order to apply for paramedic provider status, a fire department must be 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction to provide 9-1-1 emergency 
services. 
 
B. In order to apply for paramedic provider status, a law enforcement (LE) agency 
must be approved by the EMS agency. To provide ALS medical care to the 
public prior to 9-1-1 jurisdictional provider agency arrival, a LE agency must have 
an existing MOU with the jurisdictional 9-1-1 emergency services fire department 
to provide care. This policy does not apply to non-ALS care covered under 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 1.5, Article 3, 
100018 and 100019. 
 
C. A private ambulance company must be licensed by the County of Los Angeles as 
a basic life support (BLS) provider for a minimum of twenty-four months prior to 
requesting approval for paramedic provider status.  
 
D. In addition to the requirements outlined in B above, the private ambulance 
company must not be in violation of any applicable provisions, standards, or 
requirements of state statute or regulation, or of the Los Angeles County code or 
local policies and procedures for a period of one year prior to applying for 
paramedic provider status. Each of the companies’ ambulance vehicles that 
operate within the County of Los Angeles shall be licensed by the County on a 
continuous basis. 
 
II. Application Process 

SUBJECT: AUTHORIZATION FOR PARAMEDIC REFERENCE NO. 406 
 PROVIDER STATUS 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
 
A. The applicant shall submit a written request for approval of paramedic provider 
status to the Director of the Los Angeles County EMS Agency. The request shall 
include the following: 
 
1. The desired implementation date. 
 
2. The number of advanced life support (ALS) units desired and the 
proposed location for each unit. LE agencies will provide the number of 
ALS Assessment Units desired, if applicable. 
 
3. The preferred base hospital assignment, subject to EMS Agency 
approval. 
 
4. Other information pertinent to the proposed paramedic program, e.g., 
number of personnel licensed and accredited as paramedics, the number 
of personnel requiring paramedic training, and the name and contact 
information for the EMS educator, paramedic coordinator and nurse 
educator, if applicable. 
 
5. The name and contact information for the Provider Agency Medical 
Director, or Drug Authorizing Physician, under whose license the provider 
agency will procure equipment, pharmaceuticals (both scheduled and 
non-scheduled), and medical devices. 
 
B. Provider Agency Responsibilities 
 
1. Provide emergency medical service response on a continuous 24-hour 
per day basis unless otherwise approved by the EMS Agency. Approved 
ALS providers may submit a written request, including justification, to the 
EMS Agency for consideration to waive the 24-hours/day requirement. 
Waivers will be granted on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Submit to the EMS Agency a complete packet within 30 (thirty) days of 
receipt of letter and application packet from the EMS Agency 
acknowledging the request for approval. If a complete application packet 
is not received within the 30-day period, the request is denied, and a 
subsequent request for approval will not be accepted for a 90 (ninety) day 
period.  
 
A complete packet includes the following: 
 
a. A Quality Improvement (QI) Plan. 
 
b. Description of the communications equipment that will be used. 
 
c. A controlled substance policy that outlines how scheduled 
pharmaceuticals will be procured, stored, secured, and distributed. 
The policy shall include the procedure for handling any lost, 
broken, or tampered scheduled pharmaceuticals. 
 

SUBJECT: AUTHORIZATION FOR PARAMEDIC REFERENCE NO. 406 
 PROVIDER STATUS 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
d. Signed and dated copies of Ref. No. 701.1, Physician 
Confirmation of Agreement to Purchase Drugs and Medical 
Supplies, and 702.1, Provider Agency Medical Director 
Notification of Controlled Substance Program Implementation. 
 
e. A supply/resupply policy outlining the method for purchasing and 
storing non-scheduled pharmaceuticals and medical devices. 
 
f. A plan ensuring that all personnel involved in the ALS program are 
oriented to the base hospital’s operation. 
 
g. A policy/procedure to ensure that all ALS units and paramedic 
personnel are visibly identified as such. Assessment Units are not 
required to be visibly identified as such. 
 
h. A list of all the ALS, Assessment and Reserve units, numerical 
unit designation, physical address, and contact number for the 
location of each unit. 
 
3. Utilize and maintain communications as specified by the EMS Agency. 
 
4. Arrange for a base hospital orientation. (This may be facilitated in 
conjunction with the EMS Agency.) 
 
5. Procure and maintain equipment, supplies, and pharmaceuticals for 
each ALS, Assessment, and Reserve unit(s) as outlined in the applicable 
policies. Each ALS, Assessment, and Reserve unit shall undergo a unit 
inventory inspection and be approved by the EMS Agency prior to 
deployment. 
 
6. Ensure that all deployed unit(s) ALS, Assessment, and Reserve are fully 
stocked at all times. 
 
7. Private providers shall maintain a written agreement with the Los Angeles 
County EMS Agency to participate in the ALS program. This agreement 
shall be reviewed every two years and may be changed, renewed, 
canceled, or otherwise modified as necessary. 
 
8. Appoint a Paramedic Coordinator to act as the liaison with the EMS 
Agency and the assigned base hospital. 
 
9. Ensure that the paramedic coordinator attends EMS Agency Orientation 
within six (6) months of being appointed. EMS Agency Orientation dates 
are prescheduled and held on a quarterly basis). 
 
10. Staff each approved ALS unit with a minimum of two licensed and locally 
accredited paramedics in accordance with Ref. No. 408, Advanced Life 
Support Unit Staffing. 
 
11. A public provider fire department will only be considered for approval for 
the assessment unit configuration if a paramedic program consisting of a 

SUBJECT: AUTHORIZATION FOR PARAMEDIC REFERENCE NO. 406 
 PROVIDER STATUS 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
two-paramedic ALS unit response configuration is in place. The provider 
shall comply with Reference No. 416, Assessment Unit. 
 
C. EMS Agency Responsibilities: 
 
1. Acknowledge the applicant’s request in writing and furnish a generic copy 
of the applicable EMT-Paramedic Service Provider Agreement or Medical 
Control Agreement. A finalized agreement will be mailed under separate 
cover for execution. A fully executed agreement must be in place prior to 
program implementation. 
 
2. Approve or reject the request for paramedic provider status approval 
based on the EMS Agency’s review of the documents submitted by the 
applicant as outlined in “Provider Agency Responsibilities”. 
 
3. May authorize a public provider LE Agency to deploy Assessment Units in 
accordance with the Ref. No. 422, Authorization for Paramedic Provider 
Status of Los Angeles County Based Law Enforcement Agency. 
 
4. Coordinate initial EMS Patient Care Record (PCR) training with the 
paramedic coordinator or their designee. 
 
5. Periodically perform surveys and reviews, including field observation, to 
ensure compliance with state law and regulations, local policies, and if 
applicable, the EMT-Paramedic Service Provider Agreement. 
 
6. Deny, suspend, or revoke the approval of a paramedic provider for failure 
to comply with applicable policies, procedures, and regulations. 
 
7. Conduct ALS, Assessment, and Reserve unit inventory inspections prior 
to approving ALS, Assessment, and Reserve units for deployment. 
 
III. Program Updates/Modifications: 
 
A. Provider agencies may request to place additional ALS, Assessment, and 
Reserve units into service and shall notify the EMS Agency for inventory 
inspection and approval. Requests and inventory inspections shall be done prior 
to deployment. 
 
B. Provider agencies shall notify the EMS Agency for any long-term relocation of 
existing ALS units or reduction in the number of ALS units. 
 
C. Private provider agencies that have been operational as an ALS provider for at 
least one year may request approval from the EMS Agency to implement the 1:1 
staffing configuration (one EMT/one paramedic) for interfacility transports. In 
order to be considered for the 1:1 staffing configuration, the provider agency 
must successfully complete a six-month probationary period for their ALS 
program and pass an ALS site review conducted by the EMS Agency. The 1:1 
staffing configuration is contingent on meeting all the specific program 
requirements and EMS Agency approval. 
 

SUBJECT: AUTHORIZATION FOR PARAMEDIC REFERENCE NO. 406 
 PROVIDER STATUS 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
D. Provider agencies desiring to change unit configurations shall notify the EMS 
Agency for inventory inspection and approval. 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 214, Base Hospital and Provider Agency Reporting Responsibilities 
Ref. No. 408, Advanced Life Support (ALS) Unit Staffing 
Ref. No. 409, Reporting ALS Unit Staffing Exceptions 
Ref. No. 422, Authorization for Paramedic Provider Status of a Los Angeles County   
 Based Law Enforcement Agency 
Ref. No. 411, Provider Agency Medical Director 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program 
Ref. No. 701, Supply and Resupply of Designated EMS Provider Units/Vehicles 
Ref. No. 701.1 Physician Confirmation of Agreement to Purchase Drugs and Medical 
Ref. No. 702.1 Provider Agency Medical Director Notification of Controlled Drug Program 
Supplies 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 703.1 Private Provider Non-9-1-1 ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 704, Assessment Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 710, Basic Life Support Ambulance Equipment 
Ref. No. 716, Paramedic Communications System 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
 
Los Angeles County Code, Title 7.  Business Licenses, Chapter 7.16, Ambulances
