# cms1 206310

SUBJECT:  PARAMEDIC COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM REFERENCE NO. 716 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
C. Preparing PCS communications equipment specifications, operating procedures 
and maintenance standards. 
 
III.   Base Hospitals shall be responsible for: 
 
A. Providing the specific PCS base hospital communications meeting technical 
requirements outlines in the Los Angeles County’s Specification 2027 and 
operating in accordance with the transmitter power output and antenna 
specifications as set forth in the Paramedic Base Hospital Agreement. 
 
B. Acquiring, operating and maintaining communications equipment in accordance 
with applicable FCC Rules and Regulations and California Public-Safety Radio 
Association (CPRA) procedures and guidelines. 
 
C. Operating, maintaining and repairing hospital-owned PCS equipment in 
accordance with the Paramedic Base Hospital Agreement, including: 
 
1. Emergency repair of PCS equipment 
2. Quarterly preventative maintenance inspections (PMIs).   
3. Annual FCC frequency and deviation test for all radios, and visual 
inspection of antenna structures.   
 
D. Solicitation of annual reports from assigned field provider units about any chronic 
communication problems to include, but not be limited to, field equipment, dead 
space, radio failure and co-channel interference, and submit a written report to 
the EMS Agency (Attention PCS Manager).   
 
E. Obtaining and maintaining leased circuits to current or new remote control 
stations or to the closer termination point for new or current stations jointly 
determined by Hospital, EMS and ISD if hospital is afforded capability of remote 
control of radio stations location at a County site or other remotely located site.   
 
F. Paying for all costs associate with maintenance and repair of remote radio 
stations, including costs of AC power, owned by hospital and located at non-
county sites.  Requests for new sites or changes to current site configurations 
must be submitted in writing to the PCS Manager.   
 
G. Complying with system design, operating and maintenance standards for 
communications equipment as set forth in the Paramedic Base Hospital 
Agreement.  Request for changes must be submitted in writing to the PCS 
Manager.   
 
H. Complying with channel/tone assignments for communication with paramedics.  
Requests for changes must be submitted in writing to the PCS Manager. 
 
I. Providing training of personnel assigned to use PCS equipment. 
 
J. Complying with Paramedic System Trouble Control Procedures set forth in the 
Base Hospital Agreement. 
 
 

SUBJECT:  PARAMEDIC COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM REFERENCE NO. 716 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
IV. Provider Agencies shall be responsible for: 
 
A. Equipping each approved Advanced Life Support (ALS) unit with at least one 
portable radio capable of voice communications with base hospitals and 
transportable to the patient’s side.  Radio shall meet technical requirements 
outlined in the Los Angeles County’s Specification 2029.  Optional permanently 
mounted mobile radios meeting Specification 2033 may be used, but do not 
replace portable radio equipment. 
 
Provider agencies may substitute above portable equipment with “hand-held”, 
half-duplex radios described in Specification 2031.  This requires written approval 
by the EMS Agency.  Provider agencies must submit field test reports that verify 
satisfactory communications with the hand-held units in the geographic area they 
are intended for use.  Reasonable measures shall be taken to ensure base 
hospital voice communications during transport. 
  
B. Acquiring and maintaining communications equipment in accordance with FCC 
Rules and Regulations and California Public Safety Radio Association (CPRA) 
procedures.   
 
C. Operating, maintaining and repairing provider-owned PCS equipment on a 
routine and emergency basis. 
 
D. Operating PCS equipment in compliance with the Effective Radiated Power 
(ERP) and antenna specification set forth by ISD. 
 
E. Complying with channel assignments and communications protocols with Base 
Hospitals. 
 
F. Using the public telephone or cellular telephone systems to augment, but not 
replace, the above-defined communications equipment.   
 
G. Obtaining written approval from the PCS Manager for field-testing of equipment 
not currently approved for use by the EMS Agency prior to the tests.   
 
V. Communications Management Committee 
 
A. Organized to provide technical and administrative assistance to the PCS 
Manager in the design, maintenance and operation of PCS. 
 
B. The committee shall be composed of the following representatives for their 
designees: 
 
1. PCS Manager appointed by the Director of DHS. 
 
2. Chief Deputy Director, Internal Services Department 
 
3. Executive Director, Hospital Association of Southern California. 
 
4. Representative nominated by the Emergency Medical Services 
Commission. 

SUBJECT:  PARAMEDIC COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM REFERENCE NO. 716 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
 
5. Representative nominated by the Los Angeles County Ambulance 
Association. 
 
6. Representative nominated by the Los Angeles County Chapter of the 
California Fire Chiefs Association. 
 
C. Failure of the listed non-County agencies to appoint representatives to the CMC 
shall not invalidate the formation of the CMC.  Alternative arrangements which 
fulfill the purposes of this committee may also be utilized with the approval of the 
EMS Agency. 
 
D. Committee responsibilities include: 
 
1. Assessing current operations of PCS. 
 
2. Identifying new and ongoing problems. 
 
3. Developing solutions and schedules for resolving problems. 
 
4. Reporting status to participants of PCS on a regular basis.   
 
5. Bringing major problems to the attention of the directors of EMS and ISD.   
 
E. Committee shall meet on an “as-needed” basis. 
 
V. Reporting Communication Problems 
 
A. Provider agencies and base hospitals shall attempt to identify the source of a 
communication problem (e.g., equipment failure) and take internal steps to 
resolve the identified problem.  If it is determined that the problem involves a 
County remote site, the base hospital may call the 24 hours/day County ISD 
Dispatcher at (562) 401-9349. 
 
B. Ongoing system problems or problems involving County-owned equipment or 
sites should be reported in writing to the EMS Agency (Attention: PCS Manager).   
   
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Los Angeles County Specification 2027 
Los Angeles County Specification 2029 
Los Angeles County Specification 2031 
Los Angeles County Specification 2032 
Paramedic Base Hospital Agreement
