# cms1 206086

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, HOSPITALS) 
SUBJECT: DECONTAMINATION TRAILER REFERENCE NO. 1128 
 DEPLOYMENT FOR MASS CASUALTY EVENT  
 
EFFECTIVE: 02-01-07  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the release and deployment of Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency mobile decontamination trailers to sites where mass 
casualty decontamination is needed. 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
EMS AGENCY MOBILE DECONTAMINATION TRAILER: The EMS Agency owns and 
maintains two 32 ft. mobile decontamination trailers that are towed independently by two trucks. 
These can be deployed as a field resource or to a healthcare facility where decontamination 
capability is limited or non-existent. Each trailer has the following specifications: 
 
• Able to handle 96 ambulatory victims per hour (this is based on two (2) victims inside 
and six (6) victims outside showering for five (5) minutes each).  
 
• Two ambulatory lanes separated for privacy. Each lane has one wash station and one 
rinse station. Each station has three wall mounted and one ceiling mounted shower 
heads. The wash station dispenses detergent soap mixed with water. Two additional 
ambulatory lanes (each lane capable of handling three (3) victims at a time) can be 
established externally below two booms on each side of the trailer.  
 
• Non-ambulatory decontamination can be performed on a 15-ft. roller section on the 
passenger side of the trailer below two booms (wash and rinse) with three shower heads 
on each boom.  
 
• An onboard 200-gallon freshwater tank enables the decontamination process to begin 
prior to accessing a fire hydrant.  
 
• Decontamination must occur within 250 feet of a fire hydrant (uses approximately 40 
gallons of water per minute).  
 
• Water is instantly heated to 90 degrees Fahrenheit 
 
• Trailers are air conditioned.  
 
• Internal wastewater can be collected in one 1,200-gallon bladder. External wastewater 
flows into a collection basin and can be pumped into another bladder or toward a 
contaminated area of the operation. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. The County of Los Angeles EMS Agency has two mobile decontamination trucks and 
trailers that are stored and maintained at the County Disaster Staging Facility. 
 

SUBJECT: DECONTAMINATION TRAILER REFERENCE NO. 1128 
 DEPLOYMENT FOR MASS CASUALTY EVENT  
 
PAGE 2 OF 4 
2. EMS Agency mobile decontamination trailer(s) may be pre-deployed for special 
events. NOTE: Pre-deployment is the preferred and most beneficial use  
 
3. The overall authority to deploy the decontamination trailers to the field or to a 
hospital rests with the EMS Agency. 
 
4. In any event involving a terrorist attack with a release of a hazardous substance, the 
EMS Agency, hospital, and/or provider agency shall implement their terrorism 
notification procedures and monitor the situation. 
 
5. EMS Agency mobile decontamination trailer deployment shall be for incidents in 
which a hazardous substance is responsible for the casualties. The incident must 
exceed the provider agencies’ decontamination capability or hospital’s resources to 
deal with the patient load. As a general guideline, the incident should involve at least 
fifty (50).   
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Types of Deployment 
 
A. Training Deployment – A scenario involving simulated or actual 
decontamination of volunteer victims in the field or at a healthcare facility during 
an exercise or drill.  
 
B. Pre-Deployment- This scenario would involve identifying a significant event or 
large gathering where there is a possibility of localized patient surge or event of 
national significance. The trailers would be staged close to the event or 
gathering. This could be requested by a local government agency, field provider 
or hospital. NOTE: This option is the ideal use of this equipment. 
 
C. Field Deployment – This scenario involves the deployment of a decontamination 
trailer to an incident site in a public area. This would occur in the case of an overt 
chemical or radiological substance release in a populated area such as a 
stadium or inside a building. 
 
B. Hospital Deployment – This scenario may involve an overt or covert chemical 
or radiological substance release in which the first sign might be the unexplained 
surge of patients seeking treatment at local hospital, clinic, or field treatment site 
for symptoms indicating exposure to or contamination with a hazardous 
substance. 
 
II. Role of the EMS Agency 
 
A. Coordinate and facilitate training on decontamination trailers for requesting 
entity’s staff.  
 
B. Maintain and store the decontamination trailers.  
 
C. Deliver the trailer(s) to the decontamination site and deploy to a state of 
readiness.  
 

SUBJECT: DECONTAMINATION TRAILER REFERENCE NO. 1128 
 DEPLOYMENT FOR MASS CASUALTY EVENT  
 
PAGE 3 OF 4 
D. Facilitate the integration of provider agency staff/trained healthcare facility 
decontamination team members into the operation and utilization of the 
decontamination trailer(s). 
 
III. Role of the requesting entity (Provider Agency/Hospital) 
 
A. Submit a Resource Request via ReddiNet 
 
B. Pre-deployment request 
 
1. Request the number of trailers to be deployed. 
2. Identify the event deployment would support. 
3. Identify location the trailer (s) would be staged. 
4. Identify the date and duration the trailer(s) would be needed. 
5. Identify how the trailers would be secured and who is responsible for insuring 
their security. 
6. Identify a Point of Contact to include name, email, and phone number, if 
further information is needed. 
 
C. Emergency Deployment request 
 
1. If no response within 15 minutes of submitting resource request, notify the 
EMS Agency via the Medical Alert Center (MAC) by either telephone at (562) 
378-1789, ReddiNet, or VMED28 of the mass contamination incident. 
 
2. Determine whether decontamination resources are sufficient to handle the 
incident. If decontamination resources are adequate to deal with the patient 
load, generally no other assistance would be requested. 
 
3. If additional decontamination resources are required, request the deployment 
of decontamination trailer(s). Provide the MAC with the following information: 
 
a. Contact persons name, email and/or phone number 
b. Incident location;  
c. Contaminant (if known);  
d. Number and severity of victims;  
e. Chief complaint of patients;  
f. Estimated duration of need 
 
4. Provide personnel in appropriate level of personal protective equipment 
(PPE) to staff the trailer(s) in order to perform decontamination and/or assist 
victims with self-decontamination. 
 
5. Coordinate with the local law enforcement agency for force protection and 
scene control. 
 
6. Ensure there is a flat surface that is at least 65 feet in length and 30 ft in 
width with a fire hydrant connection within 250 feet. 
 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: DECONTAMINATION TRAILER REFERENCE NO. 1128 
 DEPLOYMENT FOR MASS CASUALTY EVENT  
 
PAGE 4 OF 4 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 807, Medical Control During Hazardous Material Exposure 
Ref. No. 1104, Disaster Pharmaceutical Caches Carried by First Responders 
Ref. No. 1225, Nerve Agent Exposure
