# cms1 206765

EMERGENCY
PLANNING
Immediately after an emergency, essential services may be cut off and local disaster 
relief and response may not be available right away.  Even if they could reach you, 
knowing what to do to protect yourself and household is essential.
CREATING A DISASTER PLAN
1.     Learn about the natural disasters that could occur in your community from your local emergency    
 management offi ce or chapter of the American Red Cross (ARC); whether hazardous materials are  
 produced, stored or transported near your area; and about possible consequences of deliberate acts   
 or terror.  Ask how to prepare for each potential emergency and how to respond.
2.     Review the Department’s Emergency Plan, located on the EMS Agency’s webpage.  
3.     If you have children, talk with school offi cials about their emergency response plans.
4.     Talk with your family members and others in your home about potential emergencies and how to    
 respond to each one.  Talk about what you would need to do in an evacuation.
5.     Plan how your household would stay in contact if you were separated.  Identify two meeting places:  
 select a site near your home and another location away from your neighborhood in case you cannot  
 return home.
6.     Pick a friend or relative who lives out of the area for household members to call to during an 
 emergency.
7.     Draw a fl oor plan of your home.  If possible, mark two escape routes from each room.
8.     Post emergency telephone numbers by each phone in your home.  Teach your children how and    
 when to call 9-1-1.
9.     Make sure everyone in your household knows how and when to shut off water, gas, and electricity   
 at the main switches.  Consult with your local utilities if you have questions.
10.    Take a fi rst aid and CPR class.  Local ARC chapters regularly provide training.  Offi cial certifi cation  
 by the ARC provides “Good Samaritan” law protection for those giving fi rst aid.
One of the most important steps you can take in preparing for emergencies is to develop a household disaster plan.
EMERGENCY

11.    Reduce the economic impact of a disaster on your property and your household’s health and 
 fi nancial well-being:
  a.     Review property insurance policies before disaster strikes.  Make sure policies    
   are current and be certain they meet your needs (type of coverage, amount of     
    coverage, and type of hazards covered, i.e., earthquake, fl ood, wind, etc.)
         
  b.     Protect your household’s fi nancial well-being before a disaster strikes.  Review    
   life insurance policies and consider saving money in an ‘emergency”     
   savings account that could be used in a crisis.  It is advisable to keep a    
   small amount of cash  (small bills) or traveler’s checks at home in a safe   
   place where you can quickly gain access in case of an evacuation.
  
  c.     Be certain that health insurance policies are current and meet the needs of your    
   household.
12.    Consider ways to help neighbors who may need special assistance, such as the elderly or disabled.
13.    Make arrangements for pets.  Pets are not allowed in public shelters; the only exception, service 
 animals for those who depend on them.
CREATING A DISASTER PLAN
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
2

The 2005 Hurricanes helped everyone realize that they may be on their own for several days before any assis-
tance will be available, including the fi rst responders-law, fi re, emergency medical.  Therefore, it is important 
that we be prepared at home, work and in our vehicles, as we can never predict when, where, how, or what 
type of disaster will strike.  
Putting together a disaster supply kit is not as diffi cult as you might imagine.  In fact, you will soon realize that 
many of the supplies you already have, it’s a matter of making them easily accessible during an emergency.  
The Northridge Earthquake struck while most people were sleeping.  Fortunately, it also happened on a holiday 
which probably contributed to the reduced number of fatalities.  If each member of the families impacted by the 
earthquake had individual “go kits” maybe the number of injuries would have been reduced.  What’s a go kit?  
A go kit is a backpack with:
         • Non-perishable food 
         • Water
         • Light jacket or sweater
         • Band-aids
         • Medication, if needed
         • Flashlight and batteries
You should also keep a pair of closed-in shoes next to your bed, if you wear glasses, keep them nearby.
You should keep a go kit in your car and at work.  Make sure to update the water, food and batteries twice a 
year.  If you schedule the updates to coincide with the time changes, you will ensure that you always have us-
able supplies.
By each member of your household having a go kit at home and developing a household emergency supply kit, 
you will increase your ability to be self-sustaining for extended periods should assistance be delayed.  In addi-
tion to the items previously listed, a checklist of supplies is also included.
Pre-planning mitigation will help once a disaster strikes.  Depending on the layout of your home, you may want 
to have more than one emergency container in your home, garage or storage container in your yard.  If you use 
a barrel to store your household emergency supplies, make sure it has wheels.  Once you load the container, it 
will be diffi cult to move around.
Documentation is very critical when it comes to submitting claims for reimbursement.   Copies of documents 
such as birth certifi cates, insurance policies, credit and bank account information  should be sent to your out of 
the area emergency contact or stored in a fi re-proof safe that is small enough to place in your emergency kit.  
Should your home sustain damage that will destroy your records, it will be easy to reproduce or contact insur-
DISASTER SUPPLY KITSDISASTER SUPPLY KITS
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
Continued on pg. 4
3

DISASTER SUPPLY KITS
ance companies, creditors, and bank establishments with these documents.  Although we live in a time when 
most people have cell phones, thereby eliminating the old fashion phonebook, you should maintain a printed 
copy of an updated phone list of your personal contacts, including physicians and other medical/profession-
als.
In addition to our important documents, you should videotape your home in its current state.  Make sure to 
take in all of your valuables: jewelry, pictures, furniture, appliances, etc.  Also, include your paper documents: 
insurance policies, birth and marriage certifi cates, social security cards, credit cards, bank statements, warran-
ties, etc.  Videotape each room in your home and garage including your automobile(s).   Send a copy to your 
out of the area contact.  As you update/modify your home, update the videotape.  This will help you when 
submit your claim for reimbursement.
DISASTER SUPPLY KITS
ance companies, creditors, and bank establishments with these documents.  Although we live in a time when 
most people have cell phones, thereby eliminating the old fashion phonebook, you should maintain a printed 
   First aid kit
o    Manual
o    Sterile adhesive bandages (various sizes)
o    Cleansing agents-alcohol pads, hydrogen peroxide, germicide/antiseptic wipes
o    Antibiotic ointment
o    Latex gloves 
o    Petroleum jelly
o    2-inch and 4-inch sterile gauze pads
o    2-inch and 3-inch sterile roller bandages
o    Cotton balls 
o    Scissors
o    Tweezers
o    Aspirin and/or ibuprofen
o    Ant-diarrhea medication
o    Antacid
o    Syrup of ipecac
o    Lip balm and sunscreen
o    Insect repellant
CHECKLIST
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
4

DISASTER SUPPLY KITSDISASTER SUPPLY KITS
o    Water- 1 gallon per person per day
o    Food (canned and non-perishable
o    Blankets/sleeping bags
o    Food, water and restraints for pets
o    Sturdy shoes
o    Change of clothing
o    Toilet paper and paper towels
o    Toys for children 
CHECKLIST
Essential Safety an Comfort
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
5

DISASTER SUPPLY KITSDISASTER SUPPLY KITS
o    Portable, battery operated radio or television and extra batteries
o    Flashlight and extra batteries
o    Flares
o    Water-proof matches
o    Shut-off wrench, pliers and screwdriver
o    Whistle
o    An ABC type fi re extinguisher
o    Compass
o    Work gloves
o    Paper, pens and pencils
o    Needles and thread
o    Battery operated travel alarm clock
o    Manual can opener
o    Camping cookware and utensils
o    Paper cups, plates and plastic utensils
o    All-purpose knife
o    Resealing plastic bags
o    Towelettes, soap, hand sanitizer, liquid detergent
o    Toothpaste, toothbrush
o    Shampoo, deodorant, comb and brush
o    Feminine hygiene supplies (can also be used in fi rst-aid kit)
o    Contact lens solutions
o    Heavy duty plastic bags and ties for sanitary outdoor restroom use
o    Special foods and supplies for children, elderly and pets
o    Cash, in small bills
Tools and Emergency Supplies       
CHECKLIST
Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services Agency
6
