# cms1 206217

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: NOTICE OF VIOLATION - ADMINISTRATIVE REFERENCE NO. 451.2 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-12 PAGE 1 OF 1 
REVISED: 04-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 08-01-12 
Original:  EMS Agency 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES  DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION – ADMINISTRATIVE 
 
Title 7 Business Licenses – Chapter 7.16 Ambulances       A-001 
Inspection/Incident Date: Incident Location/Address: 
 
Operator Name: CHP No.: Unit No.: VIN No.: 
 
Operator Address: City: Zip:  
 
Enforcement Officer:  
 
 
A NOTICE OF VIOLATION IS BEING IMPOSED ON THE ADMINISTRATIVE PURSUANT TO THE FOLLOWING: 
 
 
CODE SECTION 
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS CATEGORY I 
 7.16.180 
Lapse of insurance coverage even if the coverage documentation and policy are later adjusted to full coverage 
duration. 
 7.16.180 
Failure to maintain documentation (certificate of insurance) of County required insurance on file with the EMS 
Agency within 30 days of initiation or change(s) in coverage/carrier. 
 
7.16.100, 7 
Title 22, 100167(c) 
Advertisement of services as a paramedic advanced life support or critical care transport provider without 
approval for the provision of such services by the EMS Agency.  
 7.08.260 Failure to surrender ambulance vehicle business license decals to the EMS Agency. 
 7.16.040, A, 1- 3 
Failure of an ambulance operator to provide the EMS Agency with current copies of California Department of 
Motor Vehicles Registration and/or California Highway Patrol ambulance identification certificate, within 60 
days of renewal, for each licensed ambulance vehicle. 
 7.16.240, A 
Failure of an ambulance operator to provide the EMS agency with current copies of odometer testing 
certification issued by the Department of Agricultural commissioner/Weights and Measures, within 90 days of 
renewal. 
 
CODE SECTION 
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS CATEGORY II 
 7.16.085 Failure to allow EMS Agency personnel reasonable access to company records. 
 7.16.160, C-D 
Failure of an ambulance operator to provide documentation of an employee’s current, applicable, certifications 
to the EMS Agency within 5 days of issuance of citation to said employee and operator notification for failure 
to produce required certifications upon the request of the Director of the Department of Health Services or 
their designee. 
 
CODE SECTION 
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS
1 
CATEGORY III 
 7.16.100, 6 
Permit the operation of an ambulance in any manner contrary to the provisions of the Los Angeles County 
Ambulance Ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto and any section of the California 
Vehicle Code, Titles 13 and 22 of the California Code of Regulations, and the statutes, rules, and regulations of 
the Medicare and Medi-Cal programs. 
 
7.16.030 
7.16.126, A-B 
Provision of ambulance services without a valid ambulance operator’s license issued by the County of Los 
Angeles. 
 7.08.150, A, G-H 
Fraudulent reporting of any required or requested information, including tampering of any files, data or 
reports. 
 
7.16.100, 7 
Title 22, 100167 (a) 
Performing the services of a paramedic advanced life support or critical care transport provider without 
approval for the provision of such services by the EMS Agency. 
 
7.16.100,  
Use of a scanner or radio monitoring device for the purposes of responding to an emergency call when not 
authorized or requested to respond to that call by the appropriate public safety agency. 
 7.16.090 Failure of an ambulance operator to provide services 24-hours per day, seven days per week. 
 
7.16.280 
7.16.290 
7.16.310 
Billing a patient for any services provided at a rate which exceeds the County General Public Ambulance Rates 
in effect at the time of the patient transport. 
Please Note:   When applicable, violations will also be referred to other appropriate regulatory agencies for follow up. 
 
Received by______________________________________________________     ___________________________________________________________ 
   (Print name and title)      (Signature and date) 
 
A follow up letter with additional instructions will be provided. The key contact for a Notice of Violation is Ambulance Licensing Programs, tel. 562-378-1500.
