# cms1 206319

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(PARAMEDIC) 
SUBJECT: FIRELINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL REFERENCE NO. 804 
 TECHNICIAN – PARAMEDIC (FEMP) 
 
EFFECTIVE: 12-1-09  PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 04-01-21 
SUPERSEDES: 06-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________   __________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish procedures for Fireline paramedic response from and to agencies 
within or outside Los Angeles County EMS Agency jurisdiction, when requested 
through the statewide Fire and Rescue Mutual Aid System, to respond to and 
provide Advance Life Support (ALS) care on large scale incidents. 
 
AUTHORITY:  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.204, 1797.220 
  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Sections 100166 and 100167 
  California Fire Service and Rescue Emergency Mutual Aid System, Mutual Aid  
  Plan, (3-2002). 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Fireline Emergency Medical Technician-P (FEMP): A paramedic who meets all pre-requisites 
established by FIRESCOPE and is authorized by their department to provide Advanced Life 
Support (ALS) treatment on the fireline. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. When authorized by the Incident Commander or designee at an incident a paramedic 
may utilize the scope of practice for which they are trained and accredited according to 
the policies and procedures established by their accrediting local EMS agency. 
 
2. These guidelines are not intended to replace existing regional EMS policies or 
circumvent the established response of EMS in the local County. 
 
3. Upon initial request by an agency for FEMP support, the sending provider agency shall 
notify the EMS Agency by contacting the Medical Alert Center (MAC) at (562) 378-1789 
to provide the MAC operator with the following information: First and last name of the 
paramedic, State paramedic number, local accreditation number, and the name and 
location of the incident where they are being sent. Upon assignment completion, the 
provider agency shall also notify the MAC of the FEMP’s return. 
 
4. Upon arrival, the FEMP is expected to check in and obtain a briefing from the Logistics 
Section Chief, or the Medical Unit Leader or Incident Commander. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Under the authority of State regulations, a paramedic may render ALS care during 
emergency operations as long as the following conditions are met: 
 
A. The paramedic is currently licensed by the State of California and is accredited 
by a County EMS Agency within California. 
 

SUBJECT: FIRELINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL REFERENCE NO 804 
 TECHNICIAN – PARAMEDIC (FEMP) 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
B. The paramedic is currently employed and on duty with an approved ALS provider 
and possesses the requisite wildland fireline skills and equipment. 
 
C. The paramedic does not exceed the scope of practice or medical control policies 
from their county of origin. 
 
II. The Los Angeles County FEMP will function within Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, 
et al. When communication capability is available, the Medical Alert Center (MAC) shall 
be contacted at (562) 378-1789 for the EMS Agency Medical Director or designee 
approval for all procedures. The FEMP may also provide the following treatment(s): 
 
A. Additional doses of morphine sulfate may be administered to patients with a pain 
level of seven (7) or greater as follows: if respiratory rate >10 per minute and 
SBP>100mmHg, 2mg slow intravenous (IV) push. May repeat every 5 minutes to 
a maximum total dose of 20mg. 
 
B. Additional doses of fentanyl may be administered to patients with a pain level of 
seven (7) or greater as follows: if respiratory rate >10 per minute and SBP>100 
mmHg, 50-100mcg titrate to pain relief to a maximum adult dose of 200mcg. 
FOR APPROVED PROVIDERS ONLY. 
 
C. Additional dose(s) of midazolam may be administered to actively seizing patients: 
2-5mg slow IV push until the seizure stops, or to  a maximum total dose of 10mg. 
 
D. Additional doses of epinephrine 0.5mg IM may be administered to patients with 
anaphylaxis, whose symptoms persist or recur, repeat every 20 minutes to a 
maximum of 3 doses. 
 
E. Diphenhydramine can be administered to those patients with hives and itching 
due to an allergic reaction and have adequate perfusion. It may be given as 
50mg slow IV push, or deep IM. 
 
F. Fluid resuscitate in 250cc increments of normal saline to maximum of two liters 
for dehydration or shock (with the exception of cardiogenic shock). May repeat 
once as needed. 
 
G. An additional dose of ondansetron may be administered for nausea and/or 
vomiting, 4mg IV, or IM, or ODT (Orally Disintegrating Tablet). The 4mg dose 
may be repeated one time after 10 minutes if initial dose not effective. 
 
III . Controlled drugs will be obtained, secured, and inventoried as per Ref. No. 702, 
Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units. Controlled drugs shall be inventoried by two 
paramedics at least daily and anytime there is a change in staff as soon as a second 
paramedic is available to co-sign. 
 
IV. Documentation of patient care will be completed as per Ref. No. 606, Documentation of 
Prehospital Care, and legible copies of Patient Care Records (PCR) shall be distributed 
as follows: 
 
A. For incidences occurring within Los Angeles County, the FEMP shall ensure 
copies of PCRs (independent of normal daily PCRs), are forwarded to the Los 
Angeles County EMS Agency, Attention: Medical Director. 

SUBJECT: FIRELINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL REFERENCE NO 804 
 TECHNICIAN – PARAMEDIC (FEMP) 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
B. For incidences occurring outside Los Angeles County, the LA County accredited 
FEMP shall provide copies of PCRs to the on-scene Medical Unit Leader for 
distribution to the jurisdictional Local Emergency Medical Services Agency of the 
incident.  Additionally, it is the LA County accredited FEMP’s   responsibility to 
provide copies of PCRs to Los Angeles County EMS Agency through the 
mechanism outlined above.  
 
V. Upon arrival at the incident, the FEMP shall present their credentials (paramedic license 
and department identification) to the Medical Unit Leader, who will forward the 
information (deployment date and location) to the local EMS Agency as soon as 
possible. 
 
VI. County accredited FEMP shall respond with the ALS/BLS inventory as per Ref. No. 719, 
Fireline Paramedic ALS Pack Inventory, as a minimum standard in their pack while on 
the fireline. The inventory shall be supplied by the FEMP Provider Agency. (Based on 
FEMP operation assignments the inventory may be adjusted at the discretion of the 
Incident Medical Unit Leader). 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
Ref. No. 719, Fireline Paramedic ALS Pack Inventory 
Ref. No. 1006, Paramedic Accreditation 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al. 
 
FIRESCOPE
