# cms1 206350

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT/PARAMEDIC/MICN) 
SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 11-08-93 PAGE 1 OF 8 
REVISED:  07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-23  
 
 
APPROVED: _______________________ _________________________________ 
    Director, EMS Agency                      Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for EMS personnel to determine which patients who do 
not wish to be transported to the hospital have decision-making capacity to 
refuse EMS treatment and/or transport, and to identify those who may be safely 
released at scene. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.220, 1798, (a). 
California Welfare and Institution Code, Sections 305, 625, 5150, and 5170. 
Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Section 100169. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Adult: A person at least eighteen years of age. 
 
Against Medical Advice (AMA): A patient or a legal representative of a patient who has 
decision-making capacity and who refuses treatment and/or transport for an emergency 
medical condition as advised by EMS providers, physician on scene, and/or Base personnel. 
 
Assess, Treat, and Release: A patient who does not desire transport to the emergency 
department for evaluation and after an assessment and/or treatment by EMS personnel, does 
not have an ongoing emergent medical condition, a high-risk presentation, or social risk factors 
and is released at scene to follow-up with the patient’s regular healthcare provider or a doctor’s 
office or clinic. 
 
Authorized Advanced Health Care Provider: An EMS physician authorized to direct EMS 
care on the scene or via telemedicine as per Ref. 816 – Physician at the Scene, or an advanced 
practiced provider who is identified by the EMS Provider Agency Medical Director to provide 
medical direction via telemedicine as approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director. 
 
Decision-Making Capacity: The ability to understand the nature and consequences of 
proposed health care. This includes understanding the significant risks and benefits and having 
the ability to make and communicate a decision regarding the proposed health care in the 
patient’s primary language, if feasible. A person has decision-making capacity if they are able 
to: 
• Communicate the need for treatment, the implications of receiving and of not receiving 
treatment, and alternative forms of treatment that are available, and 
• Relate the above information to their personal values, and then make and convey a 
decision. 
 
The lack of decision-making capacity may be: 
• Temporarily lost (e.g., due to unconsciousness, influence of mind-altering 
substances, mental illness, or cognitive impairment) 
• Permanently lost (e.g., due to irreversible coma, persistent vegetative state, 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 8 
untreatable brain injury, or dementia) 
• Never existed (e.g., due to profound neurodevelopmental disorder, those who are 
deemed by the Court as incompetent or a person under conservatorship) 
 
Emancipated Minor: A person under the age of 18 years is an emancipated minor if any of the 
following conditions are met: 
• Married or previously married 
• Currently or previously in a valid domestic partnership  
• On active military duty 
• The person has received a declaration of emancipation pursuant to Section 7122 of the 
California Family Code, which includes all of the following: at least fourteen (14) years of 
age, living separate and apart from their parents and managing their own financial affairs 
(may be verified by DMV Identification Card) 
 
Emergency Medical Condition: A condition or situation in which a medical illness is suspected 
in a patient and there is an immediate need for medical attention. Patients with any abnormal 
vital signs: heart rate and rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure (except for isolated 
asymptomatic hypertension), oxygen saturation, and temperature (Ref. 1380 – Medical Control 
Guideline Vital Signs); and/or those who meet any criteria for Base Contact (Ref. 1200.2 – Base 
Contact Requirements) are considered to have an emergency medical condition. 
 
High Risk Presentation: Features by history or presentation that are likely to be high risk for 
complications, progression of disease, underlying serious illness or injury, or require Base 
Contact. High risk chief complaints include chest pain, abdominal pain, pregnancy, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, syncope, neurologic symptoms (e.g., dizziness/vertigo, weakness, 
visual changes), and altered mental status. High risk features include: 
 
• Patients less than 12 months of age 
• Patients older than 70 years of age 
• Patients with complicating comorbidities (i.e., active underlying cardiac, respiratory, 
kidney, liver, oncologic (cancer) or neurologic disease, or who are immunocompromised 
(e.g., history of HIV, chemotherapy, transplantation)) 
 
Implied Consent: This is a type of consent involving the presumption that an unconscious or a 
person lacking decision-making capacity would consent to lifesaving care. This shall include 
minors with an emergency medical condition when a parent or legal representative is not 
available. 
 
Lift Assist: EMS is dispatched to a scene to assist with transfer of a patient to a bed or 
wheelchair. 
 
LPS-Evaluator: An individual that is authorized under CA WIC § 5150 et seq. to evaluate and 
place a patient on a 5150/5585 written hold application, such as all law enforcement (LE) 
personnel and clinicians who are LPS-authorized by the County Department of Mental Health. 
Examples include, Psychiatric Emergency Team (PET), Psychiatric Mobile Response Team 
(PMRT), Mental Evaluation Team (MET), Systemwide Mental Assessment Response Teams 
(SMART), or others. LPS refers to “Lanterman-Petris-Short”, the names of the original state 
legislators who authored CA WIC § 5150 et seq.  
 
Medical Home: A team-based health care delivery model, which is led by a health care provider  
(i.e., primary care physician) to provide continuous, coordinated, and comprehensive medical 
care. 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 OF 8 
 
Minor: A person less than eighteen years of age. 
 
Minor Not Requiring Parental Consent is a person who: 
• Is 12 years or older and in need of care for a reportable medical condition or substance 
abuse 
• Is pregnant and requires care related to the pregnancy 
• Is in immediate danger of suspected physical or sexual abuse 
• Is an emancipated minor 
 
No Contact / No Patient: EMS is dispatched to a scene and is either cancelled prior to arriving 
at scene or no patient is found. 
 
Patient: A person who seeks or appears to require medical assessment and/or medical 
treatment (Ref. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care) 
 
Person Contact / No Patient: EMS is dispatched to a scene and a person is identified as a 
potential patient, is alert and appropriate for situation and declines assessment by EMS. 
 
Psychiatric Hold (5150 / 5585): Refers to California Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC) § 
5150 et seq. which defines the legal standard for involuntary detainment and evaluation of a 
person who, as a result of a mental health disorder, is a danger to others, or to themselves, or 
gravely disabled. “5150” refers to the code for adult patients, “5585” refers to the code for 
minors (under age 18). This is a written application by an authorized LPS-evaluator certified by 
the County to place an individual on a psychiatric hold. An authorized LPS-evaluator must 
provide the written application (“psychiatric hold” document) which must accompany the patient 
to the facility where they are transported. 
 
Public Assist: EMS is dispatched to a scene for assistance for nonmedical issues involving a 
person. 
 
Released Following Protocol Guidelines: Disposition for patients who lack established 
decision-making capacity or in whom capacity cannot be determined due to inability to access 
or assess the patient, and for whom EMS personnel have exhausted all options (including law 
enforcement when appropriate) such that EMS cannot safely access and/or transport the patient 
to the hospital.  
 
Social Risk Factors: Persons experiencing homelessness, patients in congregate living, and 
those who are a resident of skilled nursing facilities. 
 
Treatment in Place: A patient who, after an assessment and treatment by EMS personnel and 
medical clearance by an authorized advanced healthcare provider (e.g., physician, nurse 
practitioner, physician assistant) on scene (Ref. 816 Physician at the Scene) or via 
Telemedicine, does not require ambulance transport to an emergency department. Appropriate 
follow-up should be arranged by the authorized advanced healthcare provider on scene or via 
Telemedicine. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. An adult or emancipated minor who has decision-making capacity has the right to 
determine the course of their medical care including the refusal of care. These patients 
must be advised of the risks and consequences resulting from refusal of medical care. A 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 OF 8 
patient less than eighteen (18) years of age, with the exception of minors not requiring 
parental consent, mush have a parent or legal representative to refuse evaluation, 
treatment, and/or transport for an emergency medical condition. 
 
2. A patient determined by EMS personnel or the base hospital to lack decision-making 
capacity may not refuse care AMA. Mental illness, drugs, alcohol, or physical/mental 
impairment may impair a patient’s decision-making capacity but are not sufficient to 
eliminate decision-making capacity. 
 
3. Patients who have attempted suicide, or who have expressed a method, a plan, or intent 
to commit suicide (MCG 1306), should receive an evaluation by an LPS-evaluator for a 
psychiatric hold. LPS evaluator determination is the legal authority for placement or non-
placement of a psychiatric hold (5150 / 5585).  
 
4. A patient on a psychiatric hold may not be released at scene and cannot sign-out AMA. 
The patient can refuse any medical treatment as long as it is not an imminent threat to 
life or limb. 
 
5. At no time are EMS personnel expected to put themselves in danger by attempting to 
treat and/or transport a patient who refuses care.  
 
6. For patients determined to lack decision-making capacity or in whom capacity cannot be 
determined due to inability to access or assess the agitated patient, EMS personnel 
should refer to MCG 1307.4, EMS and Law Enforcement Co-Response to follow the 
escalation and communication pathway to engage law enforcement’s assistance. 
 
7. Patients for whom 9-1-1 is called but are not transported represent a potentially high-risk 
group and provider agencies should/shall have quality review programs specific to this 
patient population. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Adult With Decision-Making Capacity or Minor (Not Requiring Parental Consent) 
Refusing Transport Against Medical Advice 
 
A. EMS personnel shall advise the patient of the risks and consequences which 
may result from refusal of treatment and/or transport. The patient should be 
advised to seek immediate medical care. 
 
B. Base contact should be made prior to the patient leaving the scene for patients 
who would otherwise meet Base Contact criteria (Ref. 1200.2 – Base Contact 
Requirements) in order for Base personnel to have the opportunity to interview 
the patient and to evaluate the appropriateness of the AMA. If the patient elopes 
from the scene, EMS personnel are not required to make Base Contact. 
 
C. EMS personnel shall relay all the circumstances to the Base including 
assessment and care rendered, reasons for refusal, and the patient’s plan for 
transportation and follow-up care. 
 
D. EMS personnel shall make Base Contact prior to releasing a child at the scene 
with a parent or caregiver for all pediatric patients less than or equal to 12 
months of age.   

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 5 OF 8 
 
E. EMS personnel shall have the patient or their legal representative, as 
appropriate, sign the release (AMA) section of the Patient Care Record (EMS 
Report Form/Electronic Patient Care Record/ePCR). The signature shall be 
witnessed, preferably by a family member. 
 
F. A patient’s refusal to sign the AMA section should be documented on the Patient 
Care Record. 
 
II. Individual Lacking Decision-Making Capacity or a Minor (Requiring Parental Consent) 
 
A. The patient should be transported to an appropriate receiving facility under 
implied consent. A psychiatric hold is not required. 
 
B. If EMS personnel or the base hospital determines it is necessary to transport the 
patient against their will and the patient resists, or the EMS personnel believe the 
patient will resist, assistance from law enforcement should be requested in 
transporting the patient. Law enforcement may consider the placement of a 
psychiatric hold on the patient but this is not required for transport. In cases 
where law enforcement’s decision is to not engage, EMS personnel should follow 
guidelines outlined in MCG 1307.4, EMS and Law Enforcement Co-Response. 
 
C. Law enforcement should be involved whenever EMS personnel believe a parent 
or other legal representative of the patient is acting unreasonably in refusing 
immediate care and/or transport. 
 
III. Patients Assessed, Treated, and Released 
 
A. EMS personnel shall assess the patient for an ongoing emergency medical 
condition, high risk presentations, social risk factors, and assess that the patient 
or their legal representative has the capacity to decline transport. 
 
B. Patients with an ongoing emergency medical condition, high risk presentation or 
social risk factors who do not desire transport to the emergency department shall 
be handled as refusing transport against medical advice (refer to Policy Section 
I). 
 
C. Patients or the legal representatives of patients who contact EMS for minor 
complaints in order to have an assessment performed and determination made 
of the seriousness of the complaint and need for treatment, but later decline 
transport qualify to be assessed, treated, and released. 
 
1. In such cases, the EMS personnel should perform an assessment 
including vital signs, and after the patient or patient’s legal 
representative’s states they do not wish transport, the patient may be 
assessed, treated, and released at the scene. 
 
2. Patients should be instructed by EMS to follow-up with the patient’s 
medical home or primary care physician. The advice given should be 
documented on the Patient Care Record. The following statement is 
recommended: “After our assessment, you feel that you do not wish to be 
transported and you do not require immediate care in the emergency 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 6 OF 8 
department. You should seek care with your regular healthcare provider 
or a doctor’s office or clinic within 24 hours. If you have worsening or 
persistent symptoms or change your mind and desire transport, recontact 
9-1-1.” 
 
D. EMS personnel should not require patients who are Assessed, Treated and 
Released at scene to sign the release (AMA) section of the Patient Care Record, 
as this implies that the patient is at significant risk by not utilizing the EMS 
system for treatment and/or transportation.  
 
E. If subsequent to further assessment and discussion, the patient or the patient’s 
legal representative desires transport, EMS personnel should transport the 
patient to the hospital per destination policies. 
 
IV. Documentation 
 
A. Public Assist and Person Contact/No Patient does not require completion of a 
Patient Care Record. Documentation should follow the EMS provider agency’s 
operational policy. 
 
B.  A Patient Care Record must be completed for each patient or contact encounter 
(i.e., Lift Assist, AMA, Assess, Treat and Release, and Treatment in Place), 
including those refusing emergency medical evaluation, care and/or 
transportation against medical advice and those released at scene. EMS 
personnel shall ensure that documentation is in compliance with Ref. 606 – 
Documentation of Prehospital Care. Patient Care Record documentation should 
include: 
 
1. AMA: 
 
a. Patient history and assessment, including findings of an 
emergency medical condition or requirement to make Base 
Contact 
 
b. Assessment by EMS that the patient or legal representative is 
alert and has the decision-making capacity to refuse EMS 
assessment 
 
c. What the patient is refusing (i.e., medical care, transport) and 
reason for refusal 
 
d. Risk and consequences of refusing care and/or transport, benefits 
of transport, and alternatives as explained to the patient or legal 
representative 
 
e. Statement that the patient understands and verbalizes the risks 
and consequences of refusing care and/or transport 
 
f. Signature of patient or legal representative 
 
g. Patient’s plan for follow-up care 
 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 7 OF 8 
h. Contact with Base Hospital, as applicable 
 
i. For Minors, the relationship of the person(s) to whom the patient is 
being released 
 
2. Assess, Treat and Release: 
 
a. Patient history and assessment, including absence of findings of 
an emergency medical condition 
 
b. Assessment by EMS that the patient or legal representative is 
alert and has the capacity to make collaborative decision making 
with EMS to accept on-scene treatment, understand the need to 
have capacity for appropriate follow-up, but decline transport 
 
c. Discussion with patient including risks of non-transport, benefits of 
transport, and alternatives 
 
d. Plan for follow-up care including when to recall 9-1-1, seek 
emergency department care or follow-up with their medical home 
 
e. If Base contact was made (when applicable) 
 
f. For Minors, the relationship of the person(s) to whom the patient is 
being released 
 
3. Released Following Protocol Guidelines 
 
a. Patient history and assessment, including incomplete assessments 
and description of barriers to completing assessment 
 
b. All responding agencies on scene 
 
c. Base hospital medical direction, if applicable 
 
d. Name and assignment of the highest-ranking law enforcement officer 
involved in the decision-making, and LPS evaluator information, if 
applicable 
 
e. Reasons stated by law enforcement for disengagement when 
applicable 
 
f. Any follow up plans and resources requested and/or provided to the 
patient 
 
4. Treatment in Place: 
 
a. Document as per Assess, Treat, and Release and also include the 
name of the authorized advanced health care provider 
 
V.  Quality Improvement  
 

SUBJECT: PATIENT REFUSAL OF TREATMENT/TRANSPORT REFERENCE NO. 834 
 AND TREAT AND RELEASE AT SCENE 
 
 
 
PAGE 8 OF 8 
A. Each Provider Agency shall have a quality improvement program for patients 
who are not transported to the ED. The quality improvement program should 
include but may not be limited to the following: 
 
1. Monitor data on the frequency, percent, and type of nontransports. 
 
2. Establish a process for review of patient care records on a percentage of 
nontransports to include assessment of impact on the patient’s outcome, 
and education/training provided as indicated by this review. 
 
3. Develop a process for evaluating rate of repeat call to 9-1-1 or “rekindles”. 
 
B. Base Hospital shall incorporate patients released at the scene into their Quality 
Improvement Program (Ref. 304 – Paramedic Base Hospital Standards). The 
quality improvement program may include but not limited to the following: 
 
1. Review of select number of Base Hospital contacts for non-transports and 
provide education to base personnel as appropriate from that review. 
 
2. Inclusion of cases of patients released at the scene in Base Hospital 
Audio Recording Reviews. 
 
3. Notification of EMS provider agency quality improvement staff when the 
base has knowledge of patients who are released at the scene and return 
for evaluation in the emergency department. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 304, Paramedic Base Hospital Standards 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 832, Treatment/Transport of Minors 
Ref. No. 816, Physician At The Scene 
Ref. No. 1200, Treatment Protocols, et al. 
Ref. No. 1200.2, Base Contact Requirements 
Ref. No. 1306, Medical Control Guideline: Evaluation and Care of Patients at Rick of  
  Suicide 
Ref. No. 1307.4 Medical Control Guideline: EMS and Law Enforcement Co-Response 
Ref. No. 1309, Color Code Drug Doses 
Ref. No. 1380, Medical Control Guidelines: Vital Signs
