# cms1 206183

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
EFFECTIVE: 06-01-79   PAGE 1 OF 8 
REVISED:   10-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________          ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency  
PURPOSE: To establish minimum standards for the designation of a paramedic base hospital 
in the Los Angeles County Emergency Medical Services (EMS) system. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, 1797.56, 1797.58, 1797.59 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 100169 and 100170 
Specialty Care Center Paramedic Base Hospital Designation Agreement 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Base Hospital Medical Director (BHMD): A physician currently licensed to practice in the 
State of California, Board Certified in Emergency Medicine, and appointed by the hospital to 
provide medical oversight of the Base Hospital Program. 
 
Board Certified (BC): Successful completion of the evaluation process through one of the 
Member Boards of the American Board of Medical Specialists (ABMS) or American Osteopathic 
Association (AOA) including an examination designed to assess the knowledge, skills, and 
experience necessary to provide quality patient care in a particular specialty. 
 
Board Eligible (BE):  Successful completion of a residency training program with progression 
to board certification based on the timeframe as specified by the ABMS or AOA for a specific 
specialty. 
 
Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP): A licensed basic or 
comprehensive emergency department (ED) that is designated by the Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency to receive pediatric patients via the 9-1-1 system. These EDs provide 
care to pediatric patients by meeting specific requirements for professional staff, quality 
improvement, education, support services, equipment, supplies, medications, and established 
policies and procedures, as per the guidelines outlined in Ref. No. 316, Emergency Department 
Approved for Pediatric (EDAP) Standards. 
 
Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN): A registered nurse who has been authorized by the 
medical director of the EMS Agency as qualified to provide prehospital advanced life support or 
to issue instructions to EMS personnel within the Los Angeles County EMS system in 
accordance with standardized procedures that are consistent with statewide guidelines. 
 
Paramedic Base Hospital (PBH): A paramedic base hospital, herein referred to as base 
hospital, is one of a limited number of hospitals which, upon designation by and completion of a 
written contractual agreement with the EMS Agency, is responsible for providing online medical 
direction, prehospital education, and quality improvement activities within the Los Angeles 
County EMS system that is consistent with state guidelines. 
 
Prehospital Care Coordinator (PCC): A Registered Nurse currently licensed to practice in the 
State of California, currently certified as a MICN in Los Angeles County, and appointed by the 
hospital to coordinate all prehospital activities sponsored by that base hospital, assist the BHMD 
in the medical direction and supervision of prehospital emergency medical care personnel, and 
to maintain the daily operations of the Base Hospital. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 2 OF 8 
POLICY: 
 
I. General Requirements 
 
A. Licensed by the State of California Department of Public Health (CDPH) as a 
general acute care hospital, and 
 
1. Have a special permit for Basic or Comprehensive Emergency Medicine 
Service; and 
 
2. Be accredited by a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
recognized Hospital Accreditation Organization. 
 
B. Be designated by the EMS Agency as an EDAP. 
 
C. Have a fully executed Specialty Care Center PBH Designation Agreement with 
the EMS Agency. 
 
D. Appoint a Base Hospital Medical Director and a Prehospital Care Coordinator. 
 
E. Notify the EMS Agency, in writing, of any changes in the status of the Base 
Hospital Medical Director or Prehospital Care coordinator by submitting Ref. No. 
621.2, Notification of Personnel Change Form. 
 
F. Subscribe and have access to ReddiNet® and VMED28 communications system. 
 
II. PBH Leadership Requirements 
  
A. Base Hospital Medical Director (BHMD) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Board eligible or board certified by the American Board of 
Emergency Medicine or the American Osteopathic Board of 
Emergency Medicine in Emergency Medical Services or in 
Emergency Medicine with proof of significant experience and 
practice in EMS.   
 
b. Has experience and knowledge of base hospital operations, and 
local EMS Agency policies and procedures. 
 
c. Engaged at the base hospital in the field of emergency medicine 
as a full-time emergency physician as defined by spending a 
monthly average of at least ninety-six (96) hours in the practice of 
emergency medicine at the base hospital. These hours may 
include administrative hours spent in meeting BHMD 
responsibilities. 
 
d. Familiar with the prehospital care environment by performing ride-
a-longs with assigned ALS units, a minimum of 16 hours during 
the first 12 months as a BHMD. 
 
e. Complete an orientation to the PBH’s prehospital care program. 
 
f. Attend the EMS Agency’s Orientation Program within twelve (12) 
months of assuming the position of BHMD. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 3 OF 8 
g. Attend the EMS Update Train the Trainer sessions or complete 
EMS Update annually. 
 
2. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Directs and coordinates the medical aspects of prehospital care 
and related medical activities of all base hospital and EMS 
personnel assigned to base hospital. 
 
b. Ensures a physician, licensed in the State of California and BC or 
BE in Emergency Medicine, is assigned to the emergency 
department and available at all times to provide immediate 
medical direction to MICNs or paramedic personnel. 
 
c. Ensures the provisions of appropriate medical direction given by 
base hospital personnel is within the Paramedic Scope of Practice 
and adheres to the current policies, procedure, and protocols of 
the EMS Agency. 
 
d. Ensures the development and provision of formal prehospital 
education programs for base hospital physicians, MICNs, and 
EMS provider personnel and trainees. 
 
e. Ensures the development and implementation of a quality 
improvement (QI) program approved by the EMS Agency to 
include a written plan describing the program objectives, authority, 
organization, scope, and mechanisms for overseeing the 
following: 
 
1) Compliance with all current policies, procedures, treatment 
protocols, and medical control guidelines of the EMS 
Agency; and 
 
2) Standards of care and quality improvement indicators that 
measure quality of prehospital care issues. 
 
f. Ensures the participation of the base hospital in the EMS 
Agency’s system wide QI program. 
 
g.  Participates as needed with appropriate EMS committees and the 
 local medical community. Attend at least 50% of the Medical 
 Advisory Council meetings and delegate a designee for the 
 remaining 50% of the meetings.  
 
h.  Ongoing liaison with EMS provider agencies, local medical 
 community, and the EMS Agency 
 
i.  Collaborates with the PCC to ensure adherence to these 
 standards and the Specialty Care Center Paramedic Base 
 Hospital Designation Agreement. 
 
j. When notified of the possible deviation from medical guidelines, 
the BHMD shall: 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 4 OF 8 
1) Ensure efforts are made to gather accurate facts, and that 
a determination is made as to whether a deviation in 
medical care has occurred. 
 
2) Provide, in writing, the referral of these facts to the EMS 
Agency for its review when the seriousness of the medical 
care warrants such a referral or constitutes a violation 
under Section 1798.200 of the Health & Safety Code. 
 
3) Notify, in writing, the appropriate EMS provider agency of 
the referral of facts to the EMS Agency regarding 
substandard medical care rendered by its employee. 
 
4) Make efforts to preserve the confidential nature of the 
referral. 
 
k.  In the event the BHMD questions the medical impact of a policy of 
 the EMS Agency, the BHMD shall submit a written statement to 
 the Medical Director of the EMS Agency requesting a review of 
 the policy. 
 
B. Prehospital Care Coordinator (PCC) 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Have experience and knowledge of base hospital operations and 
EMS Agency policies and procedures.  
 
b. Be familiar with the paramedic scope of practice. 
 
c. Be familiar with the requirements of the Specialty Care Center 
PBH Designation Agreement. 
 
d. Attend the EMS Agency’s Orientation Program within six (6) 
months of assuming the position as PCC. 
 
2. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Serves as a liaison by maintaining effective lines of 
communication with base hospital personnel, EMS Agency, EMS 
provider agencies, and local 9-1-1 receiving facilities. 
 
b. Be sufficiently available during normal County business hours to 
meet the responsibilities of the PCC. 
 
c. Evaluates the performance of MICN candidates and submits 
recommendations for certification to the EMS Agency. 
 
d. Collaborates with the BHMD and the EMS provider agencies to 
provide ongoing evaluation of assessment, reporting, 
communication, and technical skills of assigned ALS units. Such 
evaluation shall include, but not limited to: 
 
1) Audit of audio recorded communication; 
 
2) Review of patient care records; 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 5 OF 8 
 
3) Coordination of structured field observation experience 
including transfer of patient care upon arrival at the 
receiving facility; and 
 
4) Coordination of direct observation of performance during 
scheduled clinical hours in the emergency department. 
 
e. Coordinates, in conjunction with the BHMD, a base hospital 
meeting or other process, which should include representation 
from hospital administration, MICNs, base hospital physicians, 
and EMS providers for: 
 
1) Providing updates on policies, procedures, and protocols. 
 
2) Providing orientation to field and base hospital operations. 
 
3) Providing a forum for problem-solving. 
 
f. Reports to the EMS Agency, in conjunction with the BHMD, any 
action of certified or licensed personnel, which results in apparent 
deficiencies in medical care or potentially constitutes a violation 
under Section 1798.200 of the Health & Safety Code. 
 
g. Maintain records of communication with base hospital personnel 
which may be inclusive of, but not limited to, base hospital 
meetings, e-mail communications, newsletters, or other 
communication related materials. 
 
h. Collaborates with the BHMD to ensure compliance to these 
Standards and the Specialty Care Center PBH Designation 
Agreement. 
 
i. Represents the base hospital at system-wide and/or regional 
meetings sponsored by the EMS Agency that address prehospital 
care issues and participates in committees and other task forces 
that may be developed. 
 
III. Base Hospital Personnel Requirements 
 
A. Base Hospital Physicians – Hospital shall ensure that at least one (1) full-time 
emergency department physician is on duty at all times who shall be responsible 
for prehospital management of patient care and patient destination. 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. BC or BE in Emergency Medicine. 
 
b. Complete the hospital’s Base Hospital Orientation Program within 
thirty (30) days of assuming base physician responsibilities. 
 
2. Responsibilities: 
 
a. Provide online medical direction and supervision of prehospital 
triage, treatment, advance life support, and patient destination. 
 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 6 OF 8 
b. Shall be immediately available for consultation by an MICN 
providing online medical direction to paramedics. 
 
B. Mobile Intensive Care Nurses (MICN) – Hospital shall ensure that at least one (1) 
MICN is on duty at all times. 
 
1. Qualifications: 
 
a. Currently certified as a MICN in Los Angeles County. 
 
b. Current Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) Provider or 
Instructor by the American Heart Association or American Red 
Cross. 
 
c. Employed and sponsored by one of the following: Base Hospital, 
EMS Agency, Paramedic Training Program, or Paramedic 
Provider Agency. 
 
2. Responsibility: provide online medical direction and supervision of 
prehospital triage, treatment, advance life support, and patient destination 
under the direction of the base hospital physician on duty. 
 
C. Data Entry Personnel – Hospital shall assign a primary and qualified back-up 
personnel (excluding PCC) to enter data into the County’s base hospital data 
collection system – Trauma and Emergency Medicine Information System 
(TEMIS).  
 
IV. Paramedic Communication System (PCS) 
 
A. Hospital shall ensure that base hospital paramedic communication equipment is 
always staffed and operational by personnel who are properly trained and 
certified in its use according to the policies, procedures, and protocols of the 
EMS Agency. 
 
B. Hospital shall comply with the specifications for hospital-owned PCS equipment 
as outlined in the Specialty Care Center PBH Designation Agreement. 
 
C. Hospital shall provide a mechanism to record, retain, and retrieve audio 
recordings of all voice field communications between the base hospital and 
receiving facilities and the paramedics. 
 
V. Educational Requirements  
 
A. Hospital shall have an EMS Agency approved Continuing Education (CE) 
program as outlined in Ref. No. 1013, EMS Continuing Education (CE) Provider 
Approval and Program Requirements. 
 
B. Develop and institute prehospital care education programs for MICNs, 
paramedics, paramedic trainees, and base hospital physicians (in collaboration 
with the BHMD). Programs shall be relevant to and enhance the practice of 
emergency medical care and include specific issues identified by quality 
improvement activities.  Education requirements of the Specialty Care Center 
Paramedic Base Hospital Designation Agreement include the provision of: 
 
1. An accumulative average of twelve (12) hours of education per year, of 
which an average of six (6) hours per year are field care audits. A base 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 7 OF 8 
hospital may require additional hours of field care audits for MICN 
sponsorship. 
 
2. A mechanism for providing and evaluating structured clinical experience 
for EMS field personnel/students, if requested. 
 
3. A mechanism to schedule structured field observation experience for 
MICNs. 
 
4. Special and mandatory training programs deemed necessary by the EMS 
Agency. Mandatory classes shall be given and scheduled, at a minimum, 
three (3) sessions so as to provide continuing education to the majority of 
the ALS Units assigned to the base hospital. 
 
5. Facilitate the education of new MICNs by providing instructors to lecture. 
perform radio simulation or assist as needed at any MICN Development 
Course.  
 
C. The following documents shall be submitted to the EMS Agency, Certification 
and Program Approvals: 
 
1.  Fourteen (14) days prior to the beginning of a planned course, submit all 
advertisements or training schedules to the EMS Agency. 
 
2. Annually (by January 31 of each year) – a summary of the CE classes 
provided during the previous year to include: date, course title, category, 
and number of CE hours. 
 
3. Within 30 days – rosters of courses mandated by the EMS Agency.  
 
VI. Quality Improvement (QI) 
 
A. Base hospital shall have a current prehospital QI plan approved by the EMS 
Agency and ensure participation in the EMS Agency’s system wide QI program 
by designating a representative for the meetings. 
 
B. Base hospital shall have a process developed, with input from the BHMD, base 
hospital physicians, PCC, MICNs, paramedics, and hospital administration to:  
 
1. Identify important aspects of prehospital care and develop related QI 
indicators; 
 
2. Evaluate prehospital care and service, including trends, to identify 
opportunities for improvement; 
 
3. Review Base Physician orders to ensure field care standards are met and 
provide feedback as needed. 
 
4. Implement corrective action to improve prehospital care and service 
delivery, or to solve problems; and evaluate the effectiveness of those 
actions; 
 
5. Identify relevant topics for the CE program; and 
 
6. Document audio communications and records reviewed, actions 
recommended and/or taken, and problem resolution. 

SUBJECT: PARAMEDIC BASE HOSPITAL STANDARDS REFERENCE NO. 304 
 
PAGE 8 OF 8 
 
 
VII. Data Collection  
 
A. Participate in the data collection process outlined in Ref. No. 644, Base Hospital 
Documentation Manual and the Specialty Care Center PBH Designation 
Agreement. 
 
B. Ensure that appropriate accountability and confidentiality are maintained for: 
 
1. Patient care records (i.e., Base Hospital Forms, EMS Report Forms, logs, 
and audio communications); 
 
2. QI records; 
 
3. CE records; and 
 
4. Records pertaining to investigations or review of possible provision of 
substandard medical care. 
 
C. Ensure compliance with requirements for retention and release of audio 
recordings, Base Hospital Forms, logs, and information sheets, and maintain 
retrieval system in collaboration with the hospital's medical record department. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
Ref. No. 201, Medical Management of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 204, Medical Council 
Ref. No. 214, Base Hospital and Provider Agency Reporting Responsibilities  
Ref. No. 316, Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics (EDAP) Standards 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 608, Retention and Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records 
Ref. No. 612, Release of Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Records 
Ref. No. 620, EMS Quality Improvement Program 
Ref. No. 621.2 Notification of Personnel Change Form Hospital Programs  
Ref. No. 644,  Base Hospital Documentation Manual 
Ref. No. 716, Paramedic Communications System 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 1010, Mobile Intensive Care Nurse (MICN) Certification 
Ref. No. 1013, EMS Continuing Education (CE) Provider Approval and Program 
Requirements 
Ref. Nos. 1200, Treatment Protocols 
Ref. Nos. 1300, Medical Control Guidelines 
 
Specialty Care Center Paramedic Base Hospital (PBH) Designation Agreement
