# cms1 206234

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
SUBJECT: TRAUMA PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 504 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 04-15-95 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: __________________________  ____________________________ 
     Director, EMS Agency      Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To determine the appropriate trauma patient destination with regards to the 
trauma center’s catchment area. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Administrative Code, Title 22, Chapter 7 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Trauma Catchment Area:  A geographical area surrounding a trauma center strictly defined by 
streets/freeways or other physical landmarks. 
 
Trauma Patient:  An injured patient that meets criteria and/or guidelines, or if in the provider’s 
and/or base hospital’s judgment it is in the patient’s best interest to be transported to a trauma 
center. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
A. Trauma patients that meet criteria, guidelines, or judgment should be transported 
to the designated trauma center or the designated pediatric trauma center. 
 
B. Only the Department of Health Services may alter trauma catchment areas. 
 
C. Patients from incident locations within the strictly defined area shall be 
transported to the designated trauma center. 
 
D. To facilitate appropriate trauma team activation, direct contact with the 
anticipated receiving trauma center should be made whenever possible. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibilities of the Paramedic: 
 
A. Maintain current knowledge of trauma centers’ catchment areas and which are 
pediatric trauma centers within their assigned area. 
 
B. Paramedics shall contact their designated receiving trauma center on all injured 
patients meeting trauma triage criteria and/or guidelines or if in the provider’s 
judgment it is in the patient’s best interest to be transported to a trauma center.  
When the receiving trauma center is not a base hospital (only applies to 
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles), paramedics shall contact their assigned base 
hospital. 
 

SUBJECT: TRAUMA PATIENT DESTINATION REFERENCE NO. 504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 2 
 
II. The following table identifies trauma centers and pediatric trauma centers: 
 
TRAUMA CENTERS PEDIATRIC TRAUMA CENTERS  
Antelope Valley Hospital  
California Hospital Medical Center  
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center X 
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles X 
Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital  
Huntington Memorial Hospital  
LAC Harbor/UCLA Medical Center X 
LAC + USC Medical Center X 
Long Beach Memorial Medical Center X 
Northridge Hospital Medical Center  X 
Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center  
Providence Holy Cross Medical Center  
St. Francis Medical Center  
St. Mary Medical Center  
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center X 
 
III. When the designated trauma center requests diversion to trauma, a trauma patient may 
be transported to: 
 
A. The most accessible open trauma center; or 
 
B. The designated trauma center, when the base hospital determines it is in the 
patient’s best interest, despite the temporary request for trauma diversion. 
 
IV. For multiple casualty incidents refer to Reference No. 519, Management of Multiple 
Casualty Incidents. 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Reference No. 501, Hospital Directory 
Reference No. 502, Patient Destination 
Reference No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Units 
Reference No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Reference No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Reference No. 515, Air Ambulance Trauma Transport 
Reference No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents
