# cms1 206297

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: SUPPLY AND RESUPPLY OF DESIGNATED (PARAMEDIC) 
EMS PROVIDER UNITS/VEHICLES REFERENCE NO. 701 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 06-08-76  PAGE 1 OF 4 
REVISED: 10-01-19 
SUPERSEDES: 04-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED:   ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide a policy for 9-1-1 provider agencies to procure, store, and distribute 
medical supplies and pharmaceuticals identified in the ALS Unit Inventory that 
require specific physician authorization. 
 
AUTHORITY:  California Health and Safety Code, Division 10, Uniform Controlled Substances 
Act; and Division 2.5, Chapter 5, Section 1798. 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 4, Article 6, Section 100168. 
 Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Section 801.109.  
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Restricted Drugs and Devices: Drugs and devices bearing the symbol statement “Rx Only”; 
legend statements,   “Caution, federal law prohibits dispensing without prescription,” or “Federal 
law restricts this device to sale by or on the order of a physician,” or words of similar import. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibilities of the Provider Agency 
 
A. Each provider agency shall have a mechanism to procure, store, and distribute 
its own restricted drugs and devices under the license and supervision of a 
physician who meets the requirements specified in Ref. No. 411, Provider 
Agency Medical Director. 
 
B.  Provider agency shall furnish the EMS Agency with a completed Ref. No. 701.1, 
Physician Confirmation of Agreement to Purchase Drugs and Medical Supplies 
indicating that the respective physician will assume responsibility for providing 
medical authorization for procuring restricted drugs and devices. 
 
C. Mechanisms of procurement may include the following: 
 
1. Procurement of restricted drugs and devices from a hospital that 
determines it has the legal authority to resell pharmaceuticals and 
supplies to a provider agency. 
 
2. Procurement of restricted drugs and devices through another legally 
authorized source, including but not limited to, a pharmaceutical 
distributor or wholesaler. 
 
D. Each provider agency shall have policies and procedures in place for the 
procurement, transport, storage, distribution, and disposal of restricted drugs and 
devices. These policies shall be reviewed by the local Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS) Agency and shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 

SUBJECT: SUPPLY AND RESUPPLY OF DESIGNATED (PARAMEDIC) 
EMS PROVIDER UNITS/VEHICLES REFERENCE NO. 701 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 4 
 
1. Identification (by title) of individuals responsible for procurement and 
distribution. 
 
2. A determination of reasonable quantities of supplies and pharmaceuticals 
that must be maintained to resupply ALS units between deliveries by 
distributor. 
 
3. Maintenance of copies of all drug orders, invoices, and logs associated 
with restricted drugs and devices for a minimum of three years. 
 
4. Procedures for completing a monthly inventory, includes: 
 
a. Ensuring medications are stored in original packaging; 
 
b. Checking medications for expiration dates, rotating stock for use 
prior to expiration, and exchanging for current medications; 
 
c. Properly disposing of expired medications that cannot be 
exchanged; 
 
d. Accounting for restricted drugs and devices in stock and/or 
distributed to ALS units and other transport units; and 
 
e. Returning medications to the pharmaceutical distributor if notified 
of a recall. 
 
5. Storage of drugs (other than those carried on the ALS unit itself) that 
complies with the following: 
 
a. Drugs must be stored in a locked cabinet or storage area. 
 
b. Drugs may not be stored on the floor (Storage of drugs on pallets 
is acceptable). 
 
c. Antiseptics and disinfectants must be stored separately from 
internal and injectable medications. 
 
d. Flammable substances, e.g., alcohol, must be stored in 
accordance with local fire codes. 
 
e. Storage area is maintained within a temperature range that will 
maintain the integrity, stability, and effectiveness of drugs. 
 
6. A mechanism for procuring, storing, distributing, and accounting for 
controlled drugs that is    consistent with the requirements outlined in Ref. 
No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
 
II. Pharmaceutical Shortages 
 
A. Notification 
 

SUBJECT: SUPPLY AND RESUPPLY OF DESIGNATED (PARAMEDIC) 
EMS PROVIDER UNITS/VEHICLES REFERENCE NO. 701 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 4 
1. Pharmaceutical recalls, shortages and other pharmaceutical-related 
concerns are identified through notifications from: 
 
a. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  
 
b. Public and private provider agencies 
 
2. Once notification is received, FDA is contacted to verify report and 
retrieve an expected recovery date. 
 
3. If notification content from the FDA is expected to impact the Los Angeles 
County (LAC) EMS System, all ALS providers will be formally notified by 
the EMS Agency’s Medical Director. 
 
B. Mitigation Strategies 
 
Mitigation strategies are identified in two categories as follows: 1. Those that can 
be implemented by the EMS provider agency simultaneous with written 
notification to the LAC EMS Agency Medical Director, and 2. those that require 
prior approval of the LAC EMS Agency Medical Director prior to implementation. 
 
1. Mitigation strategies which can be implemented by the EMS provider 
Agency with notification of the LAC EMS Agency Medical Director. 
 
a. Inventory Reduction: 
 
i. Provider agency may redistribute its current inventory 
amongst its own ALS units, from low volume to high 
volume utilizers. 
 
ii. The Medical Director of the EMS Provider Agency may 
temporarily reduce the minimum inventory par levels.
 
 
iii. Provider agencies (public and private) that are low volume 
utilizers may redistribute a portion of its current inventory to 
other provider agencies that are high volume utilizers, with 
the exception of controlled substances. 
 
b. Provider agencies should attempt procurement from other 
pharmaceutical vendor resources. 
 
c. The EMS Provider Agency may contact the LAC EMS Agency to 
obtain approval to receive pharmaceuticals from the disaster 
preparedness pharmaceutical cache to provider agencies in most 
need. 
 
d. Use of expired medications as per published FDA extensions. 
 
2. Mitigation strategies that require LA EMS Agency Medical Director 
approval prior to implementation: 
 

SUBJECT: SUPPLY AND RESUPPLY OF DESIGNATED (PARAMEDIC) 
EMS PROVIDER UNITS/VEHICLES REFERENCE NO. 701 
 
 
 
 PAGE 4 OF 4 
a. Change in opioid medication from what has previously been 
approved (i.e., change from morphine to fentanyl). 
 
b. Use of blanket extension for expiration dates on medications in 
shortage. 
 
c. Dilution of any medication to achieve the desired formulation (e.g., 
epinephrine 1mg/mL to achieve epinephrine 0.1mg/mL). 
 
d. Change in formulation of a medication that is not on the LAC EMS 
Agency approved list of formulations (Re. MCG 1309). 
 
e. Approval for extension of    expiration dates for medications not on 
the FDA extension list. 
 
C. Recovery Phase 
 
Once it has been identified that the current pharmaceutical shortage has 
resolved and provider agencies have received back-ordered medications, the 
following shall take place: 
 
1. All ALS units shall return to the minimum inventory amounts, as outlined 
in appropriate unit inventory lists. 
 
2. Pharmaceuticals acquired from the EMS Agency or other provider 
agencies (private and public) are to be equally replenished by the 
acquiring agency. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 411, Provider Agency Medical Advisor 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units 
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 704, Assessment Unit Inventory
