# cms1 206092

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: BURN RESOURCE CENTER (BRC) (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN, HOSPITALS) 
 DESIGNATION AND ACTIVATION REFERENCE NO. 1138 
 
EFFECTIVE: 09-28-09  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-21 
 
 
APPROVED:  _____________________________   ____________________________ 
  Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define the role of a Burn Resource Center (BRC) and provide guidelines for 
the utilization of BRCs and the management of burn patients during a burn 
disaster in Los Angeles (LA) County. 
 
AUTHORITY: Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA) (Public Law 109-417) 
Hospital Preparedness Program - Trauma Center Scope of Work 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Administrator on Duty (AOD): Administrator on Duty with the Los Angeles County (LAC) 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency. 
 
Burn Center: A specific area within the hospital that has committed the resources necessary to 
meeting the criteria for a burn center. This area contains beds and other equipment related to 
care of patients with burn injury. Hospitals are either approved by the American Burn 
Association or self-designated as burn centers. 
 
Burn Injury: 
 
• Major/Critical: 
 
➢ Adult patients (15 years of age or older) with 2
nd
 degree (partial thickness) and/or 
3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving equal to or greater than 20% of Total 
Body Surface Area (TBSA). 
 
➢ Pediatric patients (14 years of age or younger) with 2
nd
 degree (partial 
thickness) and/or 3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving equal to or greater 
than 10% of TBSA. 
 
• Minor: 
 
➢ Adult patients (15 years of age or older) with 2
nd
 degree (partial thickness) and/or 
3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving less than 20% of TBSA. 
 
➢ Pediatric patients (14 years of age or younger) with 2
nd
 degree (partial 
thickness) and/or 3
rd
 degree (full thickness) burns involving less than 10% of 
TBSA. 
 
Burn Resource Center (BRC): A BRC is a designated trauma center in LAC that has agreed to 
provide medical care for up to 20 critically burned patients for a minimum of 72 hours. A BRC 
shall: 
 

SUBJECT: BURN RESOURCE CENTER (BRC) 
 DESIGNATION AND ACTIVATION REFERENCE NO. 1138 
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
• Be licensed by the State Department of Health Services as a general acute care 
hospital. 
 
• Maintain a special permit for basic or comprehensive emergency medicine service. 
 
• Be designated by LAC EMS Agency as a Trauma Center. 
 
• Sign a written commitment with the LAC EMS Agency to become a BRC.  
 
Burn Surge Plan Activation: An incident resulting in 20 or more burn patients, or any event 
that exceeds burn care resources available in LAC. 
 
Local Burn Lead Specialist: A Medical Director (or designee) from a burn center in LAC who 
will be available to provide assistance to the AOD and the Medical Alert Center (MAC) in 
triaging and placement of critically injured burn patients, in accordance with Ref. No. 1138.2, 
Local Burn Lead Specialist Call Panel. 
 
Remote Burn Lead Specialist: A Medical Director from a burn center located outside greater 
LA County (Orange County, San Bernardino County, San Francisco, San Diego, and 
Sacramento) who can provide assistance to the AOD/MAC in triaging and placement of patients 
in the event that the Local Burn Lead Specialist is unavailable due to the magnitude of the 
incident, in accordance with Ref. No. 1138.3, Remote Burn Lead Specialist. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. As a recipient of the Hospital Preparedness Program (HPP) grant, LAC must work with 
healthcare entities to ready hospitals and supporting healthcare systems to deliver 
coordinated and effective care to victims of a multi-casualty burn disaster. 
 
2. In the event of a multi-casualty burn disaster, LAC may not have sufficient resources to 
manage an influx of patients; therefore, the BRC program was developed to enhance 
burn surge capacity through: 
 
a. The provision of pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, and equipment required to 
manage burn patients, as indicated in Ref. No. 1138.1, Burn Resource Center 
Required Equipment/Supplies/Pharmaceuticals. 
 
b. The provision of biennial training and resource materials to BRC staff on the 
management of burn patients. 
 
3. With additional training, pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, and equipment, trauma 
centers have the personnel and resources to adequately manage critical burn patients. 
 
4. Priority of transfer is determined by facility resources and the patient’s probability of 
survival. Probability of survival is based on TBSA, patient’s age, and co-morbidities. 
 
5. Transfer of burn patients is coordinated and arranged through the MAC in consultation 
with a Burn Lead Specialist. 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: BURN RESOURCE CENTER (BRC) 
 DESIGNATION AND ACTIVATION REFERENCE NO. 1138 
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
POLICY: 
 
I. The following trauma centers have committed to and are recognized as BRCs: 
 
A. Antelope Valley Hospital 
 
B. Cedars Sinai Medical Center 
 
C. Children’s Hospital Los Angeles 
 
D. Dignity Health - California Hospital Medical Center 
 
E. Dignity Health - Northridge Hospital Medical Center 
 
F. Dignity Health - Saint Mary Medical Center 
 
G. Henry Mayo Newhall Hospital 
 
H. Huntington Memorial Hospital 
 
I. Harbor/UCLA Medical Center 
 
J. Los Angeles General Medical Center 
 
K. MemorialCare Long Beach Medical Center 
 
L. Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center 
 
M. Providence Holy Cross Medical Center 
 
N. Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center 
 
O. Saint Francis Medical Center 
 
II. A BRC shall: 
 
A. Have a written contractual agreement with LAC EMS Agency to meet the 
requirements for program participation as specified in the HPP Agreement in 
effect. 
 
B. Ensure a constant state of readiness by maintaining and replacing 
pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, and equipment listed in Ref. No. 1138.1, 
Burn Resource Center Required Equipment/Supplies/Pharmaceuticals. 
 
C. Train a team of physicians and nurses that specialize in emergency and/or 
intensive care medicine. This team will act as a resource to hospital personnel. 
 
D. Provide for on-going training to BRC personnel to manage critically burned 
patients for a minimum of 72 hours. BRCs may have to provide care to major 
burn patients beyond 72 hours. 
 

SUBJECT: BURN RESOURCE CENTER (BRC) 
 DESIGNATION AND ACTIVATION REFERENCE NO. 1138 
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
E. Provide care for up to 20 major/critical burn patients. 
 
III. Burn Surge Plan Implementation 
 
A. Activation: The LAC EMS Agency AOD in consultation with the Local Burn Lead 
Specialist, if immediately available, shall activate the BRCs and the Burn Surge 
Plan. 
 
B. Destination: Burn patient destination guidelines are only in effect when BRCs are 
activated and include the following: 
 
1. Major/Critical burn patients or any burn patient meeting trauma criteria 
shall be transported to the most appropriate BRC. Transportation will be 
based on available resources during the Multi-Casualty Incident (MCI). 
 
2. Minor burn patients not meeting trauma criteria shall be transported to the 
most accessible receiving facility (MAR) that is not a BRC. 
 
3. MAC will coordinate distribution of burn patients to the most appropriate 
receiving facilities to avoid inundating a single facility. 
 
C. Transfer: Patient transfer guidelines to Burn Centers. 
 
1. Patient transfer to Burn Centers will be coordinated through the MAC 
under the guidance of a Burn Lead Specialist. 
 
2. LAC EMS Agency in conjunction with the burn centers will maintain a call 
panel of Local Burn Lead Specialists as indicated in Ref. No. 1138.2, 
Local Burn Lead Specialist Call Panel who are on call to assist the LAC 
EMS Agency AOD prioritize and assist burn patient transfers and 
placement. 
 
3. If a Local Burn Lead Specialist is unavailable, a Remote Burn Lead 
Specialist may be contacted as indicated in Ref. No. 1138.3, Remote 
Burn Lead Specialist. 
 
4. The Local Burn Lead Specialist shall be board certified with a specialty in 
burn management. 
 
5. Priority of transfers: 
 
a. Major/critical burn patients at a non-BRC 
 
b. Major/critical burn patients at a BRC 
 
c. Minor burn patients at a non-BRC 
 
d. Minor burn patients at a BRC 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: BURN RESOURCE CENTER (BRC) 
 DESIGNATION AND ACTIVATION REFERENCE NO. 1138 
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 506, Trauma Triage 
Ref. No. 512, Burn Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 1126, Multiple Casualty Incident Transportation Management 
Ref. No. 1130, Trauma Center Emergency Preparedness 
Ref. No. 1134, Medical Control During Mass Casualty Events and Disasters 
Ref. No. 1138.1, Burn Resource Center Required Equipment/Supplies/Pharmaceuticals 
Ref. No. 1138.2, Local Burn Lead Specialist Call Panel 
Ref. No. 1138.3, Remote Burn Lead Specialist
