# cms1 206069

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(PARAMEDIC/EMT-1) 
SUBJECT: DISASTER PHARMACEUTICAL CACHES  REFERENCE NO. 1104 
 CARRIED BY AUTHORIZED ALS PROVIDERS  
 
EFFECTIVE: 09-01-03  PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To ensure accessibility to and accountability for disaster pharmaceutical 
caches carried by authorized Advanced Life Support (ALS) providers. 
 
AUTHORITY:  Health and Safety Code, Chapter 5, Section 1798 
 Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Section 72369 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
 
To ensure terrorism preparedness in Los Angeles County, the Emergency Medical Services 
Authority approved an expanded scope of practice for paramedics to stock and use certain 
disaster pharmaceuticals.  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Disaster Pharmaceutical Cache (DPC) for Patient Use: 
 
A. Pharmaceuticals 
 
DuoDote Kits or their equivalent: a minimum of 9 auto injectors 
 
B. Procurement 
 
1. DPC stocking and re-supply of two-paramedic units will be through the 
provider agency’s purchasing entity and medical director. 
 
2. DPC re-supply and initial stocking of additional two-paramedic units will 
be through the provider agency purchasing entity and its medical director. 
 
3. If additional nerve agent antidotes are required during an incident, 
request the deployment of an EMS CHEMPACK (Ref. No. 1108) via the 
Medical Alert Center at (866) 940-4401. Provide the MAC with the 
following information: 
 
a. Incident location; 
 
b. Chemical agent (if known); 
 
c. Number and severity of victims; and 
 
d. Chief complaints of patients. 
 
C. Disaster Pharmaceutical Cache Security 
 

SUBJECT: DISASTER PHARMACEUTICAL CACHES  REFERENCE NO. 1104 
 CARRIED BY AUTHORIZED ALS PROVIDERS  
 
  PAGE 2 OF 2 
1. Paramedics assigned to an ALS unit shall be responsible for maintaining 
the correct DPC inventory for their assigned unit at all times. 
 
2. DuoDotes (or their equivalent) shall be stored in the DPC case. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 519, Management of Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Ref. No. 701, Supply and Resupply of Designated EMS Provider Units/Vehicles  
Ref. No. 703, ALS Unit Inventory 
Ref. No. 807, Medical Control During Hazardous Material Exposure 
Ref. No. 1106, Mobilization of Local Pharmaceutical Caches (LPCs) 
Ref. No. 1108, CHEMPACK Deployment for Nerve Agent Release 
Ref. No. 1240,  Treatment Protocol: HAZMAT
