# cms1 206230

COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES                                 
 
SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 503.1 
  FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SATURATION 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 11-27-06 PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED:  __________________________       _______________________________  
        Director, EMS Agency        Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the minimum requirements for hospitals to be placed on diversion of 
advanced life support (ALS) and/or basic life support (BLS) patients due to 
emergency department (ED) saturation. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Advanced Life Support Patient (ALS): A patient who requires paramedic assessment and/or 
intervention listed in Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice, this 
includes but not limited to patients meeting Base contact criteria outline in Ref. No. 1200, 
Treatment Protocols, et al. 
 
Ambulance patient offload time (APOT): Time interval between the arrival of an ambulance at 
the location outside the hospital ED where the patient will be unloaded from the ambulance and 
the time the patient is transferred to the ED gurney, bed, chair or other acceptable location and 
the emergency department assumes responsibility for care of the patient. The APOT Standard 
in Los Angeles County is an offload time within 30 minutes, 90% of the time. Currently, the data 
source for APOT is the EMS Providers’ electronic patient care report completed by the 
transporting unit. 
 
Basic Life Support Patient (BLS): A patient who only requires Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT) assessment and/or intervention as listed in Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT) Scope of Practice. 
 
Diversion: Hospital Diversion is a request by a hospital or an EMS provider agency to have 
ALS/BLS patients bypass a facility for a limited period of time and should be requested only 
when necessary. This is not an absolute closure (see Principle 7).   
 
ED ALS Diversion Threshold: All ED treatment bays are full and 30% or greater of the ED has 
patients who fall into one or both categories below, including ED beds occupied by admitted 
patients but excluding fast track beds and waiting room patients. 
 
(1) Resuscitative (unstable condition): the patient is hemodynamically unstable, requires an 
immediate airway or emergency medications. Other criteria: already intubated, apneic, 
pulseless, severe respiratory distress, acute mental status changes or unresponsive 
 
(2) Immediate/Emergent (requires timely treatment): the patient has symptoms indicative of 
a potential threat to life and their condition is likely to change to “resuscitative” without 
aggressive intervention. Examples include but are not limited to the following: stable but 
active chest pain; stroke symptoms; abdominal pain in pregnancy or suspected 
pregnancy; suicidal or homicidal ideation; new onset confusion; lethargy or 
disorientation; severe pain 
 
ED BLS Diversion: This is implemented on a case-by-case basis during periods of extreme 
surge of patients being transported via the 9-1-1 system (i.e. disease outbreak/epidemic/ 

SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 503.1 
FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SATURATION  
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 5 
pandemic) and requires the approval of the EMS Agency via the Medical Alert Center. The EMS 
Agency will evaluate the region to determine whether BLS Diversion is warranted.   
 
EMS Provider Agency Diversion Threshold (Provider ED Diversion): Three ambulance 
crews (ALS and/or BLS) have each been waiting for over 30 minutes to transfer their patient to 
hospital equipment (gurney, wheelchair, chair, etc.). 
 
Special considerations: Unusual circumstances that overwhelm ED resources and are 
documented by hospital administration. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. High quality emergency medical services (EMS) is the result of prehospital care 
providers, emergency departments and hospitals working together as a team to care for 
ill and injured patients. 
 
2. Prolonged diversion and APOT are not an emergency department problem alone; it is a 
hospital and EMS systemwide issue, both have negative impacts to the EMS providers’ 
ability to respond to subsequent 9-1-1 calls which results in prolonged response times 
and may affect public safety and patient outcomes. 
 
3. Each hospital shall have a diversion policy and a multidisciplinary team approach to 
ensure the ability of the facility to remain open and to flex to Surge Capacity, thereby 
preventing or minimizing time of hospital diversion and APOT. 
 
4. As per EMTALA, the responsibility for patient care lies with the receiving facility once the 
patient being transported via ambulance arrives at the hospital property. Hospital staff 
shall make every effort to offload patients from ambulance gurneys as soon as possible.  
 
5. Hospitals that have a consistently prolonged APOT should assign appropriate personnel 
to remain with patients while awaiting for an ED treatment bay in order to release EMS 
personnel back to the community. 
 
6. Hospital personnel shall acknowledge and provide a visual assessment of patients 
arriving via ambulance within 10 minutes of arrival in the ED to determine whether the 
patient needs an ED treatment bay or can be sent to other areas of the emergency 
department. 
 
7. In accordance with Reference No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of 
ALS Patients, final authority for patient destination rests with the base hospital handling 
the call. Whether the diversion request will be honored depends on available system 
resources. 
 
8. The State of California Emergency Medical Services Authority has adopted 
Standardized Methods for Data Collection and Reporting of APOT. The APOT Standard 
for Los Angeles County is 90% of all ambulance transports have an APOT of 30 minutes 
or less. 
 
9. The accurate documentation by EMS providers of the time metrics for APOT is 
imperative to appropriately evaluate and monitor APOT. 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 503.1 
FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SATURATION  
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 5 
POLICY: 
 
I. Responsibilities Prior to reaching Hospital Diversion Threshold 
 
A. ED Charge Nurse  
 
1. Identifies that all ED treatment bays are occupied, and patients are 
waiting for an open treatment bay. 
 
2. Consults with all ED team members to determine if patient discharges or 
admissions can be expedited. 
 
3. Ensures that all ED treatment bays are appropriately utilized. 
 
4. Notifies the Laboratory and Radiology departments to expedite orders. 
 
5. Notifies the Nursing Supervisor that the ED is near threshold. 
 
B. Hospital Administration (CEO or administrative designee) 
 
1. Consults with the ED physician and ED charge nurse. 
 
2. Performs a walk-through of the ED and reviews options that can be 
utilized to prevent hospital diversion (CEO or administrative designee). 
 
3. Assesses the ED for special considerations. 
 
4. Activates the hospital’s internal multidisciplinary surge plan. 
 
5. Assesses the Medical/Surgical, Intensive Care and Telemetry units for 
available beds and possible discharges. 
 
6. Expedites environmental services, ancillary services and patient 
admissions as necessary. 
 
7. Approves diversion due to ED saturation via the ReddiNet when ED 
capacity reaches the defined diversion threshold. 
 
8. Reassesses ED capacity during diversion with the goal of remaining 
open. 
 
9. Monitors hospital diversion hours. 
 
10. Includes diversion in the ED performance improvement process. 
 
II. ED ALS Diversion 
 
A. A hospital may request ED ALS Diversion via the ReddiNet for up to two hours at 
a time. At the end of the two hours of diversion, ReddiNet will automatically re-
open the hospital to ALS 9-1-1 traffic. The hospital may request additional ED 
ALS diversion time in two-hour increments. ALS Diversion includes ALS pediatric 
patients being transported to the Emergency Department Approved for Pediatrics 
(EDAP) 

SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 503.1 
FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SATURATION  
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 4 OF 5 
 
B. An EMS provider agency may request to put a hospital on ED ALS diversion 
(displayed on ReddiNet as Provider ED) when the EMS provider agency 
diversion threshold is met. Each EMS provider agency shall have a diversion 
request policy that is consistent with the following guidelines: 
 
1. EMS provider agency personnel who are waiting to offload and transfer 
care to hospital staff shall contact the EMS provider agency’s on-duty 
supervisor and provide the following information: 
 
a. Units waiting to offload 
 
b. Time of arrival at hospital of the unit waiting the longest to offload 
 
c. Time of arrival at hospital of the unit waiting the shortest to offload 
 
d. Estimated time to offload, obtain from ED Charge Nurse 
 
2. The EMS provider agency’s on-duty supervisor shall: 
 
a. Verify the report provided by the transport crew(s). 
 
b. Collaborate with the charge nurse, on-duty physician, or house 
supervisor to identify alternatives to facilitate the transfer of the 
patients from EMS personnel to emergency department staff. 
 
c. If the EMS provider agency diversion threshold is met, contact the 
Medical Alert Center and request the facility to be placed on 
Provider ED ALS Diversion. 
 
3. The Medical Alert Center shall: 
 
a. Obtain all the necessary information to verify diversion threshold is 
met. 
 
b. Place the hospital on Provider ED ALS diversion. Diversion will be 
for a two-hour period. At the end of the two-hour diversion, 
ReddiNet will automatically re-open the hospital to ALS 9-1-1 
traffic. EMS providers may request additional ED ALS diversion 
time in two-hour increments. 
 
c. Notify hospital administration or designee that the hospital has 
been placed on Provider ED ALS diversion. 
 
4. Hospital Administration (CEO or administrative designee) 
 
a. Reassess ED capacity during diversion with the goal of lifting the 
diversion status. 
 
b. Monitors diversion hours 
 
c. Includes diversion in the ED performance improvement process. 
 

SUBJECT: DIVERSION REQUEST REQUIREMENTS REFERENCE NO. 503.1 
FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SATURATION  
 
 
 
 
 PAGE 5 OF 5 
 
C. ED BLS Diversion 
 
1. A hospital or an EMS provider agency may request to place a hospital on 
ED BLS diversion by contacting the Medical Alert Center. ED BLS 
diversion requests will be considered for approval when the BLS 
Diversion Threshold is met and status of system resources. 
 
a. If an EMS Provider is requesting ED BLS diversion, the Medical 
Alert Center shall verify the ED BLS diversion threshold is met. 
 
b. Place the hospital on ED BLS diversion.  
 
c. Notify hospital administration or designee that the hospital has 
been placed on ED BLS diversion. 
 
2. ED BLS diversion will be approved for a four (4) hour period. At the end of 
the four-hour diversion, ReddiNet will automatically re-open the hospital 
to BLS 9-1-1 traffic. The hospital may request additional ED BLS 
diversion time by contacting the Medical Alert Center.      
 
III. Diversion Audits 
 
The EMS Agency reserves the right to conduct unannounced diversion audits as 
indicated. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 502, Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 503, Guidelines for Hospitals Requesting Diversion of ALS Patients 
Ref. No. 503.2, Diversion Request Quick Reference Guide 
Ref. No. 505, Ambulance Patient Offload Time (APOT) 
Ref. No. 802, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 803, Los Angeles County Paramedic Scope of Practice 
Ref. No. 1309, Color Code Drug Doses 
Ref. No. 1380, Vital Signs 
 
California EMSA: Ambulance Patient Offload Time (APOT) Standardized Methods for Data 
Collection and Reporting
