# cms1 206253

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT INTERFACILITY 
  TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS WITH (ALS PROVIDERS, HOSPITALS) 
ST – ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION REFERENCE NO. 513.1 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 08-01-10 PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 07-01-25 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-24 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define the transportation options available for the Emergency Department 
(ED) interfacility transfer of patients diagnosed with ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI) and who may require emergent percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI). 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code 1797.220 and 1798 
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100147 and 100169 and 
Division 9, Chapter 7.1 
Social Security Act Section 1867(a) (EMTALA) of the United States Code, 
Section 42 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The ED interfacility transfer of STEMI patients shall comply with current EMTALA and 
Title 22 transfer laws and regulations for both sending and receiving hospitals. 
 
II. Transfer agreements between approved STEMI Receiving Centers (SRC) and STEMI 
Referral Facilities (non-approved SRCs and non-PCI capable facilities) are the optimal 
practice to facilitate the transfer process. 
 
III. Transportation arrangements are the responsibility of the STEMI Referral Facility (SRF). 
The appropriate transport modality (as defined in Ref. No. 517, Private Provider Agency 
Transport/Response Guidelines) should be made in consultation with the receiving SRC. 
 
TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS: 
 
1. Private Advanced Life Support (ALS) and/or Critical Care Transport (CCT) provider 
agencies are to be utilized when the ALS/CCT transport unit is available within 10 
minutes of the initial transport request. 
 
2. The jurisdictional 9-1-1 provider agency may be contacted when a private ALS transport 
unit is not available within 10 minutes.  Patient destination shall comply with Ref. No. 
513, ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction Patient Destination. 
 
A. 9-1-1 should be accessed only when the patient is ready for immediate transport. 
 
B. Patients are to be transported to the SRC as directed by the SRF physician 
(base hospital contact/notification guidelines apply) once acceptance has been 
made by the SRC’s ED physician or interventional cardiologist. The decision to 
accept is at the discretion of the SRC’s ED physician or interventional 
cardiologist after reviewing the patient history and 12-lead ECG 
 

SUBJECT: INTERFACILITY TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS  REFERENCE NO. 513.1 
  WITH ST- ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
C. Transport units may bypass the most accessible SRC to a prearranged receiving 
SRC within 30 minutes if, the provider-based resources at the time of transport 
allow. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 320.2, Sample Memorandum of Understanding Agreement for Interfacility                                
                         Transfer of Acute STEMI Patients 
Ref. No. 513, ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 517, Private Provider Agency Transport/Response Guidelines 
 
Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA)
