# cms1 206349

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT-I/EMT-P/MICN) 
SUBJECT: TREATMENT/TRANSPORT OF MINORS REFERENCE NO. 832 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-08-93 PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 01-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: __________________________ ____________________________ 
       Director, EMS Agency     Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To describe the guidelines for treatment and/or transport of a patient under the 
age of eighteen. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code Section 124260 
 California Family Code 6922, 6925, 6926, 6927, 6929, 7002, 7050, 7122, 7140 
 Business and Professions Code 2397 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Emergency Medical Condition: A condition or situation in which an individual has an 
immediate need for medical attention. The presence of abnormal vital signs (heart rate and 
rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure – except isolated asymptomatic hypertension, oxygen 
saturation) are also indications of an emergency condition. Patients who meet any criteria for 
Base Contact or Receiving Hospital Notification are also considered to have an emergency 
medical condition. 
 
Implied Consent: In the absence of a parent or legal representative, emergency treatment 
and/or transport of a minor may be initiated without consent. 
 
Legal Representative: A person who is granted custody or conservatorship of another person 
by a court of law. 
 
Minor: A person less than eighteen years of age. 
 
Minor not requiring parental consent is a person who is: 
 
1. Married or was previously married. 
 
2. Currently or prvieously in a valid domestic partnership. 
 
3. Not married and has an emergency medical condition and parent is not available. 
 
4. On active duty with the Armed Forces. 
 
5. Self-sufficient 14 years of age or older, living separate and apart from his/her 
parents, and managing his/her own financial affairs. 
 
6. An emancipated minor with a declaration by the court or an identification card 
from the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
 
7. Seeking care related to the treatment or prevention of pregnancy. 
 
8. In need of care for sexual assault or rape. 
 

SUBJECT: TREATMENT/TRANSPORT OF MINORS REFERENCE NO. 832 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 3 
9. Seeking care related to an abortion. 
 
10. 12 years of age or older and in need of care for communicable reportable 
disease, prevention of a sexually transmitted infection (STI), alcohol or substance 
abuse, or outpatient mental health. 
 
Voluntary Consent: Treatment or transport of a minor child shall be with the verbal or written 
consent of the parents or legal representative. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
I. Treatment/Transport of Minors 
 
A. In the absence of a parent or legal representative, minors with an emergency 
medical condition shall be treated and transported to the appropriate receiving 
facility or a specialty care center (e.g. EDAP, PMC, PTC, SART Center, Trauma 
Center, etc.). 
 
Minors should be transported using a restraint device appropriate for their size, 
weight, transport position, and medical condition.  Restraint devices used should 
comply with the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 213. 
 
C. Hospital or provider agency personnel shall make every effort to inform a parent 
or legal representative where their child has been transported. 
 
D. If prehospital care personnel believe a parent or other legal representative of a 
minor is making a decision which appears to be endangering the health and 
welfare of the minor by refusing indicated immediate care or transport, law 
enforcement authorities should be involved. 
 
E. Infants ≤ 12 months of age shall be transported, regardless of chief complaint 
and /or mechanism of injury, in accordance with Ref. No. 1200.2, Treatment 
Protocol: Base Contact Criteria. 
 
II. Minors Not Requiring Transport 
 
A. A minor child (excluding children < twelve (12) months of age) who is evaluated 
by EMS personnel and determined not to be injured, to have sustained only 
minor injuries, or to have illnesses or injuries not requiring immediate treatment 
or transportation, may be released to: 
 
1. Self (consideration should be given to age, maturity, environment and 
other factors that may be pertinent to the situation) 
 
2. Parent or legal representative 
 
3. A responsible adult at the scene 
 
4. Designated care giver 
 
5. Law enforcement 
 

SUBJECT: TREATMENT/TRANSPORT OF MINORS REFERENCE NO. 832 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 3 
B. Children 13 - 36 months of age require base hospital contact and/or transport, 
except those with no medical complaint or with isolated minor extremity injury. 
 
C Prehospital care personnel shall document on the EMS Report Form to whom 
the patient was released. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
Ref. No. 508, Sexual Assault Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 508.1, SART Center Roster 
Ref. No. 510, Pediatric Patient Destination 
Ref. No. 822, Suspected Child Abuse Reporting Guidelines 
Ref. No. 834, Patient Refusal of Treatment / Transport & Treat & Release at Scene 
Ref. No. 1200.2 Treatment Protocol: Base Contact Requirements
