# cms1 206282

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 
(EMS) RECORDS REFERENCE NO. 612 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 01-14-77       PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To establish a procedure for release of EMS patient care records which contain 
protected health information. 
 
AUTHORITY: Health & Safety Code, Sections 123100 – 123149.5  
American Hospital Association, A Patient’s Bill of Rights 
Healthcare Information Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)  
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Protected Health Information (PHI): Individually identifiable health information that is held or 
transmitted in any form or media, whether electronic, written, spoken, printed, digital, recorded, 
or photographic, which can be linked to an individual, or there is reasonable basis to believe it 
can be used to identify an individual. 
 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Records: EMS records exist in different formats and 
include those on which written, printed, spoken or digital information is recorded or preserved. 
For purposes of this policy, EMS records consist of the Base Hospital Forms and EMS Report 
Forms which include but are not limited to: Base Hospital Page 2s, Base Hospital Multiple 
Casualty Incident (MCI) Forms, Advanced Life Support (ALS) Continuation Forms, and Triage 
Tags. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Patients have the right to communicate with healthcare providers in confidence and to 
have the confidentiality of their PHI maintained. 
 
2. Patients have the right to review and receive a copy their own medical records upon 
presenting to the healthcare provider a written request specifying the records to be 
copied. 
 
3. Attorneys may request EMS records in accordance with the law. 
 
POLICY: 
 
Individual’s requesting the release of an EMS record shall be directed in the following order:  
 
I. Hospital 
 
A. The requesting individual will be referred to the Medical Records Department of 
the healthcare facility where the patient was transported.  
 

SUBJECT: RELEASE OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 
(EMS) RECORDS REFERENCE NO. 612 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
B. If available, the facility’s procedure for releasing medical records shall be 
followed. 
 
II. Provider Agency 
 
A. If the receiving hospital does not have a copy of the EMS record or if the patient 
was not transported, the individual may request the provider agency to release 
the document. 
 
B. The provider agency’s policy or procedure for releasing medical records shall be 
followed and the report shall be released only upon receipt of a: 
 
1. Subpoena Duces Tecum, or 
 
2. An authorization form signed by the patient or patient’s representative 
such as a Release of Medical Records, Request for Patient Access to 
Health Information, or the provider agency’s own form to ensure proper 
release of medical information. 
 
III. EMS Agency 
 
A. If neither the hospital nor the provider agency is able to provide the requested 
EMS record, the EMS Agency may be asked to release the document.   
 
B. If the records are available, they shall be released only upon receipt of a: 
 
1. Subpoena Duces Tecum, or 
 
2. An authorization form for Release of Medical Records, Request for 
Patient Access to Health Information or similar form signed by the patient 
or patient’s representative. 
 
AND 
 
3. The EMS Agency shall require reasonable verification of identity, such as 
photo identification, prior to permitting inspection or copying of the EMS 
records. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCE 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 602, Confidentiality of Patient Information 
Ref. No. 622, Release of EMS Data
