# cms1 206354

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
(EMT, PARAMEDIC, HOSPITALS) 
SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
EFFECTIVE: 01-01-95  PAGE 1 OF 7 
REVISED: 04-01-22 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-18 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________     __________________________________ 
 Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for EMS personnel exposed to blood, airborne biological 
agents, or other potentially infectious material. 
 
AUTHORITY:  California Health and Safety Code, Division 105, Chapter 3.5, Sections 120260- 
120263 
 California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.188 -189, 120980, 121050-
121070 
U.S. Department of Labor-Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
Bloodborne Pathogens Standard 1910.1030 6-8-2011 
California Occupational Safety and Health Standards Exposure Control Plan for 
Bloodborne Pathogens (2001)  
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Modernization Act of 2006 
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, Section 164.512.b.4 (October 2007) 
California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Section 5193 and 5199 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Aerosol transmissible disease (ATD) or aerosol transmissible pathogen (ATP): A disease 
or pathogen for which droplet or airborne precautions are required such as tuberculosis (TB), 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS Co-V-2) (COVID-19), and pertussis. 
 
Airborne infectious disease (AirID): 1) An ATD transmitted through dissemination of airborne 
droplet nuclei, small particle aerosols, or dust particles; 2) a novel (unknown ATP) disease 
process suspected of being transmitted as above. 
 
Attending physician of the source patient: Any physician or surgeon who provides health 
care services to the source patient. 
 
Available blood or patient sample: Blood, other tissue, or material legally obtained in the 
course of providing health care services and in the possession of the physician or other health 
care provider of the source patient prior to the release of the source patient from the 
physician’s or health care provider’s facility. 
 
Body Substance Isolation (BSI): A method of infection control designed to approach all body 
fluids as being potentially infectious. It is the preferred infection control concept for EMS 
personnel. 
 
Certifying physician: Any physician consulted by the exposed individual for the exposure 
incident. 
 
Communicable disease: Any disease that is transferable through an exposure incident, as 
determined by the certifying physician. 
 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 2 OF 7 
Designated officer: An official or officer designated by the prehospital emergency medical 
services provider or private ambulance company. This person is responsible for coordinating 
communicable disease exposure and testing procedures for EMS personnel. 
 
Exposed individual: Any individual health care provider, first responder, or any other person, 
including, but not limited to, any employee, volunteer, or contracted agent of any health care 
provider, who is exposed, within the scope of their employment, to the blood or other potentially 
infectious materials of a source patient. 
 
Exposure certification: A determination by the certifying physician on the exposure’s 
significance. 
 
Health facility infection control officer: The official or officer who has been designated by the 
health facility to communicate with a designated officer, or his or her designee. 
 
Legal representative: For purposes of giving consent to communicable disease testing, 
whenever the word "source patient" is used herein, it shall also be deemed to mean the source 
patient's legal representative. 
 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Specialized clothing or equipment worn by personnel 
for protection from exposure to blood or other potentially infectious material. See “universal 
infection control precautions”. 
 
Significant exposure: Direct contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials of a 
patient in a manner that is capable of transmitting a communicable disease. 
 
Source patient: Any person receiving health care services whose blood or other potentially 
infectious material is the source of a significant exposure to prehospital care personnel. 
 
Standard Precautions: A combination of the major features of Universal Precautions and Body 
Substance Isolation based on the principle that all blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions 
except sweat, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes may contain transmissible infectious 
agents. 
 
Universal Infection Control Precautions: A method of infection control in which human blood 
and certain human body fluids are treated as if known to be infectious for blood borne 
pathogens. 
 
Urgency reporting requirement: A disease required to be reported immediately by telephone 
or reported by telephone within one working day pursuant to subdivisions (h) and (i) of Section 
2500 of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. EMS personnel must observe “body substance isolation” in situations where there is a 
potential for contact with blood, body fluids, or other potentially infectious material. 
 
2. EMS personnel are frequently exposed to blood and other potentially infectious materials 
of patients whose communicable disease infection status is unknown. EMS personnel 
who experience a significant exposure to these substances are permitted, under certain 
conditions, to learn the communicable disease infection status of the source patient. 
 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 3 OF 7 
3. Early knowledge of infection with a communicable disease is important to allow exposed 
persons to make informed health care decisions and take measures to reduce the 
transmission of the infection to others. 
 
4. A health care provider shall not draw blood, or a patient sample for the sole purpose of 
communicable disease testing, if the source patient refuses communicable disease 
testing. If the source patient’s communicable disease status is unknown and the patient 
refuses communicable disease testing, only available blood or patient sample may be 
tested for any communicable disease. 
 
5. California law prohibits an exposed individual from attempting to directly obtain informed 
consent to communicable disease testing from a source patient. 
 
6. EMS personnel exposed/infected with SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) shall follow their 
departmental policies and procedures. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Designated Officer 
 
A. EMS provider agencies must appoint a designated officer. The designated 
officer, or his or her designee, shall be available either onsite or on call 24 hours 
per day as determined by the EMS Provider. 
 
B. An employer of a prehospital emergency medical care personnel that maintains 
an internet web site shall post the title and telephone number of the designated 
officer or the facility’s infection control officer in a conspicuous location on its 
internet web site accessible from the home page. 
 
II. Infection Control Officer 
 
A. The health facility infection control officer, or his or her designee, shall be 
available either onsite or on call 24 hours per day as determined by the health 
facility. 
 
B. A health facility that maintains an internet web site shall post the title and 
telephone number of the health facility infection control officer in a conspicuous 
location on its internet web site accessible from the home page. 
 
III. Evaluation and Certification of an Exposure 
 
A. In the event of an exposure to blood or other potentially infectious material of a 
patient, exposed EMS personnel are to follow their provider agency's post-
exposure protocol, including the completion of the Ref. No. 836.2, Communicable 
Disease Exposure and Notification Form, or the equivalent. 
 
1. The exposed individual shall make a written request for exposure 
certification within 72 hours of the exposure and a physician should 
promptly evaluate the exposure. 
 
2. No physician or other exposed individual shall certify their own exposure; 
however, an employing physician may certify the exposure of one of their 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 4 OF 7 
employees. 
 
3. EMS personnel with a significant exposure should seek medical 
evaluation and treatment immediately. 
 
B. The certifying physician shall provide written certification of the exposure’s 
significance within 72 hours of the request. The certification shall include the 
nature and extent of the exposure. 
 
C. The health facility infection control officer shall notify: 
 
1. The exposed individual’s designated officer; and, 
 
2. The Los Angeles County Health Officer or designee at (213) 240-7941 
from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday, or (213) 974-1234 during 
non-business hours and ask for the on-call physician. 
 
D. The designated officer shall immediately notify their employee health officer if the 
reportable communicable disease or condition has an urgency reporting 
requirement on the list of reportable diseases or conditions, or if the conditions of 
the exposure may have included direct contact between the unprotected skin, 
eyes, or mucous membranes of the prehospital emergency medical care person 
and the blood of the person afflicted with the reportable communicable disease 
or condition. 
 
E. The exposed individual shall be counseled regarding the likelihood of 
transmission, limitations of the tests performed, need for follow up testing, and 
the procedures that the exposed individual must follow regardless of the source 
patient’s test results. 
 
F. Within 72 hours of certifying the exposure as significant, the certifying physician 
shall provide written certification to the source patient’s attending physician. The 
certification shall: a) indicate that a significant exposure has occurred, b) request 
information regarding the communicable disease status of the source patient and 
the availability of blood or other patient samples. The source patient’s attending 
physician shall respond to the request for information within three working days. 
 
G. Many source patients are discharged from the emergency department; 
therefore, the exposure certification should be made immediately available 
to the emergency department where the source patient is being treated.  
This may allow the source patient to consent to communicable disease 
testing while still in the emergency department. 
 
IV. Communicable Disease Status of Source Patient 
 
A. Known Communicable Disease Status 
 
1. If the source patient’s communicable disease status is known, the source 
patient’s attending physician shall obtain consent to disclose the 
communicable disease status to the exposed individual. 
 
2. If the source patient cannot be contacted, or refuses to consent to the 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 5 OF 7 
disclosure, then the exposed individual may be informed of the 
communicable disease status by the attending physician as soon as 
possible after the exposure has been certified as significant. 
 
B. Unknown Communicable Disease Status 
 
1. If the communicable disease status of the source patient is unknown, and 
blood or other patient samples are available, and the exposed individual 
has tested negative on a baseline test for communicable diseases, the 
source patient shall be given an opportunity to give a voluntary, written, 
informed consent to test for communicable diseases. 
 
2. The source patient shall be provided with medically appropriate pretest 
counseling and referred to appropriate posttest counseling and follow-up 
if necessary. The source patient shall be offered medically appropriate 
counseling whether or not he or she consents to testing. 
 
3. Within 72 hours after receiving a written certification of significant 
exposure, the source patient’s attending physician shall make a good 
faith effort to notify the source patient about the significant exposure. A 
good faith effort to notify includes, but is not limited to, a documented 
attempt to locate the source patient by telephone or by first-class mail 
with certificate of mailing. An attempt to locate the source patient and the 
results of that attempt shall be documented in the source patient’s 
medical record. 
 
4. An inability to contact the source patient after a good faith effort, or the 
inability of the source patient to provide informed consent shall 
constitute a refusal of consent provided all the following conditions are 
met: 
 
a. The source patient has no authorized legal representative, 
 
b. The source patient is incapable of giving consent, and 
 
c. In the opinion of the attending physician, the source patient will be 
unable to grant informed consent within the 72-hour period 
required to respond. 
 
5. If the source patient refuses consent to test for communicable 
diseases, any available blood or patient sample of the source patient 
may be tested. The source patient shall be informed that the 
available blood or patient sample will be tested despite their refusal, 
and the exposed individual shall be informed of the results 
regarding communicable diseases. 
 
6. If the source patient is deceased, consent to perform a test for any 
communicable disease on any blood or patient sample of the source 
patient legally obtained in the course of providing health care services at 
the time of the exposure shall be deemed granted. 
 
7. The source patient shall have the option not to be informed of the test 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 6 OF 7 
result. If a source patient refuses to provide informed consent to 
communicable disease testing and refuses to learn the results of testing, 
documentation of the refusal shall be signed. The source patient’s refusal 
to sign shall be construed as a refusal to be informed of the test results. 
Test results shall only be placed in the source patient’s medical record 
when the patient has agreed in writing to be informed of the results. If the 
source patient refuses to be informed of the test results, the test results 
shall only be provided to the exposed individual in accordance with 
applicable Federal and State occupational health and safety standards. 
 
V. Confidentiality and Liability 
 
A. The exposed individual shall be informed that any identifying information about 
the communicable disease test results and medical information regarding the 
communicable disease status of the source patient shall be kept confidential and 
may not be further disclosed, except as authorized by law. The exposed 
individual shall be informed of the civil and criminal penalties for which they 
would be personally liable for violating Health and Safety Code Section 120980. 
 
B. The costs for communicable disease testing and counseling of the exposed 
individual, and/or the source patient, shall be borne by the employer of the 
exposed individual. 
 
C. The source patient's identity shall be encoded on the communicable disease test 
result record. 
 
D. If the health care provider has acted in good faith in complying with Health and 
Safety Code Chapter 3.5, the health care provider shall not be subject to civil or 
criminal liability or professional disciplinary action for: 
 
1. Performing communicable disease tests on the available blood or patient 
sample of the source patient. 
 
2. Disclosing the communicable disease status of a source patient to the 
source patient, the source patient’s attending physician, the certifying 
physician, the exposed individual, or any attending physician of the 
exposed individual. 
 
E. Any health care provider or first responder or any exposed individual who willfully 
performs or permits the performance of a test for communicable disease on a 
source patient that results in economic, bodily, or psychological harm to the 
source patient, without adhering to the procedure set forth in Health and Safety 
Code Chapter 3.5 is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the 
county jail for a period not to exceed one year, or a fine not to exceed ten 
thousand dollars ($10,000), or both. 
 
VI. Coroner's Cases 
 
 If the source patient is pronounced dead in the field, the County Medical 
Examiner/Coroner may test for any communicable disease when an autopsy is 
performed. The certifying physician or the exposed EMS personnel’s employer shall 
notify the County Medical Examiner/Coroner of the exposure. If the County Medical 

SUBJECT: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE EXPOSURE REFERENCE NO. 836 
AND TESTING 
 
 
 
 PAGE 7 OF 7 
Examiner/Coroner confirms a diagnosis of any communicable disease in the source 
patient, they shall notify the County Health Officer, who in turn shall apprise the exposed 
individual of the source patient’s communicable disease status. The County Medical 
Examiner/Coroner shall adhere to the procedure defined in Health and Safety Code 
1797.189 in carrying out this process. 
 
VII.   Source Patient in Custody or Charged with a Crime 
 
 If the source patient is in custody or charged with a crime and refuses to voluntarily 
consent to communicable disease testing, Health and Safety Code 121060, 121060.1, 
and 121065 allows for the exposed health care provider to petition the court. The court 
may require the source patient to provide three specimens of blood to be tested for HIV, 
hepatitis B, and hepatitis C by court order (Ref. No. 836.3). 
 
VIII. Aerosol Transmissible Disease 
 
 Provider agencies shall have written procedures to be followed in the event of an 
exposure incident in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Section 
5199. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 836.1, Communicable Disease Exposure and Testing Flow Chart 
Ref. No. 836.2, Communicable Disease Exposure and Notification Report Form 
Ref. No. 836.3, Court Petition for Order to Test Accused Blood 
 
Reportable Diseases and Conditions:  
http://www.publichealth.lacounty.gov/acd/docs/ReportableDiseaseListMarch2020.pdf
