# cms1 206280

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
PREHOSPITAL PATIENT CARE RECORDS REFERENCE NO. 608 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 09-23-76       PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the appropriate procedure for retention and disposition of Prehospital 
Patient Care Records which includes but is not limited to the following formats: 
electronic patient care record (ePCR), EMS Report form, Base Hospital Form, 
Multiple Casualty Incident (MCI) Base Hospital Form, Base Hospital Form Page 
2, Advanced Life Support (ALS) Continuation Form, Triage Tags, base hospital 
radio contact logs, base hospital medical control audio recordings, and private 
provider agency patient care records. 
 
AUTHORITY: California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100128, 100170 
  California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14124.1  
 California Health and Safety Code section 1797.98(e)  
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Prehospital patient care records contain patient information which is protected under the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and shall be maintained in 
accordance with HIPAA regulations. 
 
2. Prehospital care providers and base hospitals have an obligation to ensure the security 
of confidential patient information. 
 
3. Personnel responsible for all aspects of prehospital patient care record maintenance 
(including data entry personnel) shall receive appropriate training related to patient care 
record confidentiality. 
 
4. Prehospital patient care records shall be maintained in a secure location with access 
limited to authorized personnel. 
 
5. Provider agencies and base hospitals are responsible for maintaining the original copy of 
prehospital patient care records. 
 
6. Original patient care records of all patients shall be retained for a minimum of seven 
years. Original patient care records of minors shall be kept for at least one year after 
such minors have reached the age of 18, but in no event less than seven years following 
the provision of service. 
 
7. Records shall be accessible for audit review by EMS Agency personnel. 
 
8. All records related to either suspected or pending litigation shall be retained indefinitely. 
 
 
 

SUBJECT: RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF 
PREHOSPITAL CARE RECORDS REFERENCE NO. 608 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
POLICY: 
 
I. Provider Agency Prehospital Patient Care Records:  
 
A. ePCR, EMS Report Form, and ALS Continuation Forms are utilized as applicable 
for all 9-1-1 patients (ALS and BLS) and for private provider transports where 
base contact is made for medical control and are distributed as follows: 
 
1. White (Original) - Retained by the EMS Provider Agency that initiates the 
form. 
 
2. Red (Receiving Hospital) - Left with the receiving facility for transported 
patients. This copy becomes part of the patient’s medical record at the 
receiving facility. If the patient is not transported, disposition is at the 
discretion of the EMS Provider Agency that initiates the form. 
 
3. Yellow (EMS Agency) - Sent to the EMS Agency within 30 days of the 
last day of the preceding month. The EMS Agency shall retain until the 
data has been entered into the Trauma Emergency Medical Information 
System (TEMIS) database. 
 
B. Private provider agency-specific, non-9-1-1 prehospital patient care records are 
completed for all patients and are distributed as follows: 
 
1. Original copy - Retained by the private provider agency that initiates the 
form. 
 
2. Duplicate copy – Left with the receiving facility for patients transported to 
a healthcare facility. This copy becomes part of the patient’s medical 
record at the receiving facility. If patient is not transported to a healthcare 
facility, disposition is at the discretion of the private provider agency that 
initiates the form. 
 
C. Triage Tags - In the event of a multiple casualty incident where triage tags are 
utilized, the original triage tag will remain with the patient, if transported, the 
triage tag should become part of the patient’s medical record at the receiving 
facility. If the patient is not transported, the triage tag is to be retained as the 
original patient care record. 
 
II. Base Hospital Records:  Base Hospital Form, MCI Base Hospital Form, and Base 
Hospital Form Page 2 are utilized, as applicable, for all patients requiring base hospital 
contact and are distributed as follows: 
 
A. White (Original) - Retained by the Base Hospital that initiates the form. 
 
B. Red (Complimentary) - Used at the discretion of the Base Hospital. 
 
C. Black (Complimentary) - Used at the discretion of the Base Hospital. 
 
III. Maintenance of Prehospital Care Patient Records 
 

SUBJECT: RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF 
PREHOSPITAL CARE RECORDS REFERENCE NO. 608 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
A. Prehospital patient care records shall be delivered to the EMS Agency in a 
manner that ensures form security and patient confidentiality. 
 
B. Prehospital patient care records in paper format, may be stored electronically 
upon written approval by the EMS Agency. 
 
IV. Destruction of Prehospital Care Patient Records 
 
A. Prehospital patient care records that are eligible for destruction shall be disposed 
of in accordance with all applicable laws. 
 
B. Complimentary and supplemental copies of prehospital patient care records shall 
be disposed of in accordance with all applicable laws. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Policy Manual: 
Ref. No. 602, Confidentiality of Patient Information 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 607, Electronic Submission of Prehospital Data 
Ref. No. 702, Controlled Drugs Carried on ALS Units
