# cms1 206277

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES      
 
SUBJECT: PREHOSPITAL CARE FORMS (EMT, PARAMEDIC, MICN) 
 REFERENCE NO. 604 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 03-31-08       PAGE 1 OF 2 
REVISED:  04-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To outline the appropriate process for procurement of prehospital care forms 
which includes: EMS Report Form, Advanced Life Support (ALS) Continuation 
Form, Base Hospital Form, Base Hospital Form Page 2, and Base Hospital 
Multiple Casualty Incident (MCI) Form. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. Prehospital care forms are revised on a regular basis to reflect medical advances, integrate 
evidence-based medical practices and perform relevant EMS system analysis. 
 
2. Sequence number duplication is costly and time consuming to correct. Every effort shall be 
made to ensure that duplication does not occur. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. EMS Report Forms and Base Hospital Forms provided by the EMS Agency 
 
A. Routine Distribution of Base Hospital Forms 
 
1. The form vendor contracted by the EMS Agency distributes Base Hospital 
Forms every three months, based on projected base contact call volume.  
 
2. The EMS Agency will: 
 
a. Coordinate the form distribution with the form vendor to ensure 
base hospitals have a sufficient supply of forms available. 
 
b. Maintain an inventory of forms distributed and reconcile monthly 
with the form vendor’s records. 
 
B. EMS Report Forms  
 
1. The private EMS provider shall: 
 
a. Utilize EMS Agency supplied EMS Report forms only for patient 
transports where base contact is made   
 
b. Contact the EMS Agency’s Data Systems Management Chief (or 
designee) to coordinate a date and time to pick-up EMS Report 
Forms at the EMS Agency at least one week prior to desired form 
pick-up date. 
 

SUBJECT: PREHOSPITAL CARE FORMS REFERENCE NO. 604 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2 
2. The public EMS provider shall maintain EMS Agency-supplied EMS 
Report forms on each apparatus, to be utilized only during electronic 
patient care record (ePCR) system failure. 
 
3. The EMS Agency shall maintain an inventory of forms distributed and 
reconcile monthly with the form vendor’s records. 
 
C. Requests for ALS Continuation Forms, Base Hospital Page 2, and Base Hospital 
MCI Forms 
 
1. The requesting party shall e-mail their request to the EMS Agency’s Data 
System Management Chief for ALS Continuation forms, Base Hospital 
Page 2, or Base Hospital MCI forms as soon as the need becomes 
evident. 
 
2. The EMS Agency will acknowledge the request and confirm pick up 
arrangements with the requesting party. 
 
II. Base Hospital Forms NOT provided by the EMS Agency 
 
A. Form Approval Procedure  
 
1. The requesting base hospital shall submit a written request to the Director 
of the EMS Agency advising the EMS Agency of their desire to utilize 
their own form. 
 
2. Submit a DRAFT form to the EMS Agency for approval prior to printing 
the forms. Each time a revision is made, the form shall be approved prior 
to printing. 
 
3. Forms must have all of the appropriate copies for distribution and contain 
all current data elements. 
 
B. Form Printing Procedure 
 
1. Print no more than a 6-month supply of forms as data elements may 
change. 
 
III. Fees 
 
A. There is no charge to utilize EMS Agency-supplied EMS Report Forms or Base 
Hospital Forms. 
 
B. Base hospitals utilizing their own forms are responsible for all costs incurred by 
such processes. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual 
Ref. No. 606, Documentation of Prehospital Care 
Ref. No. 608, Retention and Disposition of Prehospital Patient Care Records
