# cms1 206068

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 (HOSPITAL) 
SUBJECT: DISASTER RESOURCE CENTER (DRC)  REFERENCE NO. 1102 
 DESIGNATION, ACTIVATION, AND MOBILIZATION OF EQUIPMENT  
 
EFFECTIVE: 07-01-06  PAGE 1 OF 5 
REVISED:  01-01-24 
SUPERSEDES: 10-01-20 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency  Medical Director, EMS Agency 
PURPOSE: To define the role of the Disaster Resource Center (DRC) in Los Angeles 
County emergency medical services system and to provide guidelines for the 
activation and mobilization of DRC resources during disasters. 
 
AUTHORITY:  Public Health Services Act, 42 U.S.C.247d, Section 319, Public Health and 
Social Security Emergency Funds 
 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Recovery Form and Response 
to Terrorist Attacks on the United States Act, 2002, Public Law 107-117 
 Hospital Preparedness Program (HPP) Specialty Care Center Designation 
(SCCD) Master Agreement (HPP Exhibit) 
 California Code of Regulations Title 22 (22 CCR), §70805 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Disaster Resource Center (DRC): Is one of a limited number of volunteer hospitals that are 
responsible for developing plans, relationships, and procedures to enhance hospital surge 
capacity for responding to a terrorist/disaster event in a geographical area. A DRC shall: 
 
• Be licensed by the State Department of Health Services as a general acute care 
hospital. 
 
• Have a special permit for basic or comprehensive emergency medicine service. 
 
• Be designated by the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency upon execution of the 
HPP Exhibit. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. As a recipient of the (HPP) Grant, the County of Los Angeles must work with healthcare 
entities to ready hospitals and supporting healthcare systems to deliver coordinated and 
effective care to victims of terrorism and other public health emergencies. The DRC 
program was developed to enhance surge capacity through: 
 
a. The provision of ventilators, pharmaceuticals, medical/surgical supplies, and 
large tent shelters to provide treatment to victims of a terrorist event, natural 
disaster, or other public health emergency. 
 
b. Hospital planning and coordination in a geographical area regarding the use of 
non-hospital space to shelter and treat mass casualties, and incorporate the role 
of local community health centers, clinics, and other healthcare partners. 
 
 

SUBJECT: DISASTER RESOURCE CENTER (DRC) REFERENCE NO. 1102 
 DESIGNATION AND MOBILIZATION  
 
PAGE 2 OF 5 
2. Any or all DRC resources may be deployed to care for disaster victims when the local 
healthcare system is overwhelmed. The use and deployment of DRC resources to the 
field and/or local hospitals shall be under the direction of the EMS Agency as the 
Medical and Health Operational Area Coordinator (MHOAC) for the County of Los 
Angeles. 
 
3. If any or all of the DRC equipment and supplies are needed outside of the DRC’s 
geographical area, the EMS Agency will coordinate the necessary transportation 
ensuring delivery to the impacted area. 
 
4. Each DRC is responsible for having and maintaining the pharmaceutical cache and 
medical/surgical cache in a constant state of readiness.  Replacement of the outdated 
items is the responsibility of each DRC. 
 
5. The County of Los Angeles has designated the following thirteen (13) hospitals as 
DRCs: 
 
A. Cedars Sinai Medical Center 
 
B. Children’s Hospital Los Angeles 
 
C. Dignity Health- California Hospital Medical Center 
 
D. Dignity Health- Saint Mary Medical Center 
 
E. LAC Harbor-UCLA Medical Center 
 
 
F. Henry Mayo Newhall Hospital 
 
G. Kaiser Foundation Hospital- Los Angeles 
 
 
H. Los Angeles General Medical Center 
 
I. MemorialCare Long Beach Medical Center 
 
J. PIH Health Whittier Hospital 
 
K. Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center 
 
L. Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center 
 
M. Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. DRC Responsibilities:  
 
A. Identify a hospital DRC Coordinator who shall be responsible for the functions of 
the DRC and serve as a liaison by maintaining effective lines of communication 

SUBJECT: DISASTER RESOURCE CENTER (DRC) REFERENCE NO. 1102 
 DESIGNATION AND MOBILIZATION  
 
PAGE 3 OF 5 
with DRC personnel, the local EMS Agency, assigned umbrella hospitals, local 
clinics, EMS provider agencies, and other healthcare entities. 
 
B. Establish plans and/or procedures for the use of  equipment and ensure 
appropriate instructions are provided.  
 
C. Maintain ongoing participation with community wide planning activities, to include 
collaboration with other hospitals, clinics, and EMS provider agencies within 
geographical area. Planning will have an emphasis on responding to mass 
casualty events. 
 
D. Other provisions set forth in the HPP Exhibit. 
 
II. DRC Supplies and Equipment 
 
A. Support equipment as indicated in Ref. No. 1102. 2, DRC Equipment Checklist. 
 
B. Local Pharmaceutical cache as indicated in Ref. No.1106.1,LPC Inventory and 
Checklist for Items Deployed 
 
C. Medical/Surgical Supply cache as indicated in Ref. No. 1107.1, M/SS Cache 
Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed 
 
D. At least one EMS and one hospital CHEMPACK as indicated in Ref. No. 1108.1, 
CHEMPACK Inventory List. 
 
E. Other provisions set forth in the HPP Exhibit. 
 
III. Activation and Mobilization of DRC resources 
 
A. Activation- in support of expanding capability at the DRC 
 
a. Requests for the activation of DRC resources shall be made to the County 
by contacting the EMS Agency’s Medical Alert Center or Medical 
Coordination Center (MCC) via the ReddiNet or by telephone at (866)940-
4401. Hospital administration of the DRC and the EMS Agency will work 
collaboratively to accommodate the request. 
 
b. The DRC shall: 
 
a. Ensure any equipment set-up is approved by local fire authority and 
Licensing and Certification district office. 
 
b. When additional medical resources are needed from the County to 
support medical operations, submit a Resource Request via 
ReddiNet. If ReddiNet is not available, use the Resource Request 
Medical and Health form 
https://file.lacounty.gov/SDSInter/dhs/243593_FRM-
ResourceRequestMedicalandHealth-20140814.xlsx and fax to (562) 
906-4300 
 
 

SUBJECT: DISASTER RESOURCE CENTER (DRC) REFERENCE NO. 1102 
 DESIGNATION AND MOBILIZATION  
 
PAGE 4 OF 5 
 
B. Mobilization-in support of expanding capability outside of the DRC 
 
Requests for mobilization of DRC resources by a requesting hospital/entity 
(recipient) shall be made to the County by contacting the EMS Agency’s 
Medical Alert Center or Medical Coordination Center (MCC) via the 
ReddiNet or by telephone at (866) 940-4401 
 
1. The EMS Agency shall: 
 
a. Approve or deny the request 
 
b. If approved, authorized the DRC to release equipment/supplies to 
receipt 
 
c. Assist with recovery of assets, if needed 
 
2. The DRC shall: 
 
a. Receive a list of requested supplies and equipment from the EMS 
agency that are authorized for mobilization to the recipient. 
 
b. Coordinate mobilization logistics with the recipient  
 
a. Date 
b. Time 
c. Location 
d. Contact information 
 
c. Prepare the requested supplies and equipment for mobilization. 
 
d. Obtain a facility or government issued photo identification with their 
name from the recipient; and 
 
e. Maintain documentation related to deployment and recovery (Ref. 
No. 1102.3). 
 
f. Recover equipment/supplies from recipient 
 
g. Contact the EMS Agency if problems arise with recovery 
 
3. Recipient shall: 
 
a. Coordinate mobilization logistics with the DRC  
 
b.  Upon arrival at the designated location contact DRC POC; and 
 
c. Provide a facility or government issued photo identification with their 
name to the DRC POC; and 
 
d. Sign the required form(s) (Ref. No. 1102.3) acknowledging the 
receipt of the supplies and equipment. 

SUBJECT: DISASTER RESOURCE CENTER (DRC) REFERENCE NO. 1102 
 DESIGNATION AND MOBILIZATION  
 
PAGE 5 OF 5 
 
e. Return equipment when no longer needed in the condition it was 
received and return supplies once able to procure. 
 
CROSS REFERENCE: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
 
Ref. No. 1102.2, DRC Equipment Checklist  
Ref. No. 1102.3 DRC Equipment/Supplies Release Agreement 
Ref. No. 1106.1, LPC Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed 
Ref. No. 1107.1, M/SS Cache Inventory and Checklist for Items Deployed 
Ref. No. 1108.1,  Chempack Inventory List
