# cms1 206224

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 
 
SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE VEHICLE COLOR SCHEME 
 AND INSIGNIA GUIDELINES  REFERENCE NO. 454 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 08-01-12       PAGE 1 OF 3 
REVISED: 01-01-23 
SUPERSEDES: 07-01-19 
 
 
APPROVED: ________________________ ______________________________ 
Director, EMS Agency   Medical Director, EMS Agency 
 
PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the approval of color scheme, insignia, and vehicle 
wraps used to identify ambulance vehicles licensed to operate in the County of 
Los Angeles. 
 
AUTHORITY: Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Division 2, Chapter 7.16. 
 California Code of Regulations, Title 13, Chapter 5. Special Vehicles, Article 1, 
Ambulances, Section 1100.4 Ambulance Identification. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Color Scheme: A distinctive color or combination of colors associated with the ambulance 
operator and, used on all ambulance vehicles, signs, etc. 
 
Insignia: The distinctive logotype or emblem that identifies the ambulance operator and maybe 
used on its ambulance vehicles. 
 
Vehicle Wraps: A graphic design applied to the ambulance for the express purpose of mobile 
advertisement used to enhance the appearance of the vehicle. 
 
PRINCIPLES: 
 
1. As part of the ambulance operator Business License Application approval process, 
applicants must identify their company color scheme, insignia, and vehicle wraps 
designated for use on ambulance(s) submitted for licensure. 
 
2. The color scheme, insignia and vehicle wraps must provide easy identification by the 
public and include the business entity operating the ambulance service or the name under 
which the ambulance licensee is doing business or providing service. 
 
3. Ambulance operators who contract with a healthcare facility to provide specialized 
transport services may incorporate the healthcare facility’s color scheme and/or insignia to 
the approved color scheme and insignia of the ambulance. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The color scheme, insignia, and vehicle wraps displayed on licensed ambulances must 
receive approval from the Ambulance Licensing Hearing Board during the licensure 
process. Subsequent changes must receive approval from the EMS Agency prior to 
implementation. 
 
II. Basic Requirements 
 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE VEHICLE COLOR SCHEME 
 AND INSIGNIA GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 454 
 
PAGE 2 OF 3 
 
A. Ambulances operated under a single license shall have one color scheme and 
display the same company insignia on both sides and the rear of the vehicle that 
conforms with the following requirements: 
 
1. Lettering must distinctly contrast with the background color and be visible 
during daylight. 
 
2. Lettering must be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and proportionate 
in width. 
 
3. Lowercase letters must be three-fourths (¾) the height of uppercase letters. 
 
4. Appearance of the operator name on other areas of the vehicle (e.g. roof or 
front), must be consistent. 
 
B. Acceptable vehicle wraps must include the name of the operating entity, be 
readily identifiable, and meet the following additional requirements:  
 
1. Vehicle wraps must be designed to avoid distracting other drivers, and 
potential risks to road safety. 
 
2. Vehicle wrap designs used for the purpose of public service 
announcements must readily identify the name of the operating entity. 
 
3. Vehicles with wrap designs must include the lettering “Ambulance” across 
the front of the vehicle. 
 
C. Signage on vehicles authorized for advanced life support (ALS) or critical care 
transport (CCT) must meet the following additional requirements: 
 
1. Lettering such as “Mobile Intensive Care Unit,” “Paramedic,” “Specialty 
Transport,” “Critical Care Unit,” etc., must receive EMS Agency approval 
and be staffed at the level indicated on the vehicle (e.g., paramedic or 
nurse and/or respiratory care practitioner) to operate under this designation 
in Los Angeles County.  Ambulance vehicles must obtain EMS Agency 
approval as an advanced life support (ALS) unit or critical care transport 
(CCT) unit prior to operating under this designation. 
 
2. The EMS Agency does not authorize the use of the word “Emergency” on a 
private ambulance unless it is included in the name of the operating entity. 
 
III. Procedures for Obtaining Approval to Change Existing Color Scheme / Insignia /Vehicle 
Wraps 
 
A. The EMS Agency must approve any changes to existing color schemes, 
insignias, and/or vehicle wraps prior to implementation.   
 
B. Submit requests to change the existing color scheme, insignia and/or vehicle 
wraps in writing signed by the President/Chief Executive Officer of the 
ambulance operator to the EMS Agency’s, Ambulance Program Head and 
include: 

SUBJECT: PRIVATE AMBULANCE VEHICLE COLOR SCHEME 
 AND INSIGNIA GUIDELINES REFERENCE NO. 454 
 
PAGE 3 OF 3 
 
a. A color photograph or drawing of the proposed color scheme, insignia, 
and/or vehicle wraps. 
 
b. Specify whether the proposed changes are for ambulances contracted 
with a healthcare facility or the operator’s entire fleet. 
 
C. The EMS Agency is not responsible for any costs associated with changes to the 
color scheme, insignia, and/or vehicle wraps resulting from recommended 
changes or denials. 
 
 
CROSS REFERENCES: 
 
Prehospital Care Manual: 
Ref. No. 450, Los Angeles County Code, Title 7, Business Licenses, Division 2, Chapter 
7.16 Ambulances 
Ref. No. 455, Ambulance Vehicle Age Limit Requirements and Exemption
